1331 D iabetes mellitus and obesity are associated with increased susceptibility to cardiovascular disease.1,2 Data derived from the Framingham study suggest that men with diabetes mellitus have a 2.4-fold higher incidence of heart failure; the risk of heart failure is even higher (5.1-fold) in diabetic women.3 The increased prevalence of heart failure in diabetes mellitus is only in part because of the increased risk of atherosclerotic coronary disease and its complications. Diabetics also develop a unique cardiomyopathic condition, termed diabetic cardio- myopathy,4 6 that is independent of coronary artery disease. Diabetic cardiomyopathy is characterized by extensive fibrotic changes, expansion of the cardiac interstitium,7 and profound alterations in the cardiac interstitial matrix8 leading to increased myocardial stiffness and development of diastolic dysfunction.9 Despite its significance, the pathophysiologic basis of cardiac fibrosis in diabetes mellitus remains poorly understood. Editorial, see p 1272 Tissue fibrosis requires the dynamic participation of the extracellular matrix and is regulated by a family of structur- ally unrelated macromolecules called matricellular proteins.10 Matricellular proteins are generally not expressed in the Integrative Physiology 2013 American Heart Association, Inc. Circulation Research is available at http://circres.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.113.302593 Rationale: Diabetes mellitus is associated with cardiac fibrosis. Matricellular proteins are induced in fibrotic conditions and modulate fibrogenic and angiogenic responses by regulating growth factor signaling. Objective: Our aim was to test the hypothesis that the prototypical matricellular protein thrombospondin (TSP)- 1, a potent angiostatic molecule and crucial activator of transforming growth factor- , may play a key role in remodeling of the diabetic heart. Methods and Results: Obese diabetic db/db mice exhibited marked myocardial TSP-1 upregulation in the interstitial and perivascular space. To study the role of TSP-1 in remodeling of the diabetic heart, we generated and characterized db/db TSP-1 / (dbTSP) mice. TSP-1 disruption did not significantly affect weight gain and metabolic function in db/db animals. When compared with db/db animals, dbTSP mice had increased left ventricular dilation associated with mild nonprogressive systolic dysfunction. Chamber dilation in dbTSP mice was associated with decreased myocardial collagen content and accentuated matrix metalloproteinase-2 and -9 activity. TSP-1 disruption did not affect inflammatory gene expression and activation of transforming growth factor- /small mothers against decapendaplegic signaling in the db/db myocardium. In cardiac fibroblasts populating collagen pads, TSP-1 incorporation into the matrix did not activate transforming growth factor- responses, but inhibited leptin-induced matrix metalloproteinase-2 activation. TSP-1 disruption abrogated age- associated capillary rarefaction in db/db mice, attenuating myocardial upregulation of angiopoietin-2, a mediator that induces vascular regression. In vitro, TSP-1 stimulation increased macrophage, but not endothelial cell, angiopoietin-2 synthesis. Conclusions: TSP-1 upregulation in the diabetic heart prevents chamber dilation by exerting matrix-preserving actions on cardiac fibroblasts and mediates capillary rarefaction through effects that may involve angiopoietin-2 upregulation. (Circ Res. 2013;113:1331-1344.) Key Words: diabetic cardiomyopathies fibrosis matrix metalloproteinases thrombospondins ventricular remodeling Original received September 11, 2012; revision received September 25, 2013; accepted September 25, 2012. In August 2013, the average time from submission to first decision for all original research papers submitted to Circulation Research was 12.8 days. From the Department of Medicine (Cardiology), Wilf Family Cardiovascular Research Institute, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY (C.G.-Q., M.C., A.B., P.K., D.-W.L., A.S., O.F., M.D., A.S., N.G.F.); and Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX (C.G.-Q., A.B., M.D., N.G.F.). The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article at http://circres.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA. 113.302593/-/DC1. Correspondence to Nikolaos G. Frangogiannis, MD, Wilf Family Cardiovascular Research Institute, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Ave, Forchheimer G46B, Bronx NY 10461. E-mail nikolaos.frangogiannis@einstein.yu.edu Thrombospondin-1 Induction in the Diabetic Myocardium Stabilizes the Cardiac Matrix in Addition to Promoting Vascular Rarefaction Through Angiopoietin-2 Upregulation Carlos Gonzalez-Quesada, Michele Cavalera, Anna Biernacka, Ping Kong, Dong-Wook Lee, Amit Saxena, Olga Frunza, Marcin Dobaczewski, Arti Shinde, Nikolaos G. Frangogiannis Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 1332 Circulation Research December 6, 2013 normal heart, but are markedly upregulated in the remodel- ing myocardium, and, through binding to structural matrix proteins, serve as molecular bridges between the matrix and the cells, transducing or modulating growth factor signals.11 14 Thrombospondin (TSP)-1 is a prototypical matricellular pro- tein that is not part of the normal cardiac matrix network, but is upregulated in cardiac remodeling because of myocardial infarction15 or pressure overload.16 In the pressure-overloaded heart, TSP-1 modulates fibroblast phenotype by activating transforming growth factor (TGF)- and preserves the matrix by inhibiting matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity.16 In addition to its profibrotic and matrix-preserving actions, TSP- 1 is also a potent angiostatic mediator,17,18 which promotes en- dothelial cell apoptosis through activation of a CD36/p59fyn/ p38 mitogen activated protein kinase pathway.19 Experimental and clinical studies have demonstrated that obesity and diabetes mellitus are associated with marked up- regulation of TSP-1 in the adipose tissue and in the cardio- vascular system.20,21 In adipose tissue harvested from obese patients, TSP-1 expression was markedly increased and was strongly associated with insulin resistance and inflammatory activity.21 Moreover, in obese diabetic Zucker rats, TSP-1 pro- tein expression was markedly upregulated in the vascular ad- ventitia and in the cardiac interstitium20; TSP-1 induction in diabetic vessels was associated with reduced density of vasa vasorum. In vitro, hyperglycemia potently upregulated TSP-1 synthesis; high glucose levels induced a 30-fold increase in TSP-1 expression by isolated endothelial cells, smooth mus- cle cells, and fibroblasts.20 We hypothesized that, through its profibrotic and angiostat- ic properties, TSP-1 may play an important role in remodeling of the diabetic heart. Incorporation of TSP-1 in the interstitial matrix of the diabetic myocardium may locally activate TGF- signaling, inducing fibroblast activation and promoting fibrot- ic remodeling. Moreover, through its potent angiostatic prop- erties, TSP-1 may be responsible for the impaired angiogenic responses in the diabetic heart. To test this hypothesis, we used the db/db mouse, a model of genetic obesity and diabetes mellitus due to central leptin resistance that is associated with progressive cardiac fibrosis.22 A marked TSP-1 upregulation in db/db hearts predominantly localized in perivascular and in- terstitial areas was demonstrated. Through the generation and systematic study of db/db TSP-1 / (dbTSP) mice, we found that TSP-1 loss attenuates diabetes mellitus associated cardi- ac fibrosis and enhances myocardial protease activity, without significantly improving diastolic function. In contrast, loss of the matrix-preserving actions of TSP-1 resulted in mild left ventricular dilation and modest nonprogressive systolic dys- function. In vitro, TSP-1 incorporation in collagen gels did not activate latent TGF- , but exerted matrix-preserving actions by inhibiting leptin-induced MMP activation. Assessment of the cardiac vasculature demonstrated that TSP-1 loss attenu- ated diabetes mellitus associated vascular rarefaction, docu- menting that TSP-1 upregulation is an important angiostatic mediator in the diabetic myocardium. Our in vivo and in vi- tro studies demonstrated that TSP-1 induction in the diabetic heart upregulates angiopoietin-2 expression, suggesting a novel TSP-1 mediated angiostatic pathway. Methods Detailed methodology is provided in the Online Data Supplement. Generation of db/db TSP-1 / Mice Animal studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and at Baylor College of Medicine. Leprdm/+ on a C57BL6J background (db/+) were purchased from Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME. TSP-1 / mice (on a C57BL6J background) were obtained from our own colony.15,16,23 TSP-1 / db/db mice were generated by crossing db/+ mice and TSP-1 / animals. Genotyping was performed through established PCR protocols. Assessment of Adiposity Lean and fat tissue mass was measured in db/db (male, n=9; female, n=7) and dbTSP mice (male, n=11; female, n=5) at 2 and 4 months of age by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry. Assessment of Metabolic Profile Animals used for assessment of metabolic parameters in the serum (n=5 per group) were euthanized at 2 months of age and blood was collected by aortic puncture. Plasma glucose, insulin, cholesterol, leptin, adiponectin, triglyceride, free fatty acid, and glycerol lev- els were assessed at the Baylor College of Medicine Diabetes and Endocrinology Research Center Core. Echocardiography For echocardiographic analysis, db/db (n=14) and dbTSP (n=19) mice were imaged at 4, 6, 8, and 12 months of age using a Vevo770 system (Visualsonics, Toronto, Canada). Assessment of Contractile Function and Reserve in Isolated Perfused Mouse Hearts Wild-type (WT; n=7), db/db (n=10), and dbTSP (n=14) mice were used for functional analysis in an isolated perfused heart system. Hearts were perfused in the Langendorff mode and subjected to do- butamine infusion to assess inotropic and lusitropic responses. Immunohistochemistry and Histology For histopathologic analysis, zinc/formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections were obtained from WT, db/db, and dbTSP hearts at 6 and 12 months of age. Collagen fibers were identified by Picrosirius red stain- ing. For visualization of myocardial capillary network, CD31 immuno- histochemistry was performed using the rat antimouse CD31 antibody (BD Pharmingen) as previously described.24 To identify cardiac arte- rioles, immunohistochemistry with an anti- -SMA antibody (Sigma) was performed as previously described.24 TSP-1 immunostaining was performed using a mouse monoclonal antibody to TSP-1 (NeoMarkers). Assessment of capillary and arteriolar density was performed. Capillary and arteriolar densities were expressed as vessels/mm2. RNA Extraction and Quantitative Real-Time PCR Gene expression in hearts and cultured fibroblasts was assessed us- ing quantitative PCR. The sequences of primers used in the study are listed in Online Table I. Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms MMP matrix metalloproteinase Smad small mothers against decapendaplegic TGF- transforming growth factor- TSP-1 thrombospondin-1 VEGF vascular endothelial growth factor Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 Gonzalez-Quesada et al TSP-1 in Diabetic Cardiomyopathy 1333 Protein Extraction and Western Blotting Protein was isolated from whole WT, TSP-1 / , db, and dbTSP hearts (n=8 per group) and Western blotting was performed as previously described. Hydroxyproline Assay To assess collagen deposition in WT, db/db, and dbTSP hearts (n=8 per group), we used a previously described method25 that uses hy- droxyproline content as surrogate measure of collagen. Zymography MMP activity in murine WT, db, and dbTSP hearts (n=8 per group) was assessed by gelatin zymography as previously described.26 Isolation and Stimulation of Cardiac Fibroblasts in Collagen Pads WT mouse cardiac fibroblasts were isolated by enzymatic digestion as previously described.25 To study the effects of matrix-bound TSP-1 on cardiac fibroblasts, an in vitro assay of cardiac fibroblasts populat- ing collagen pads in the presence or absence of TSP-1, leptin, and active or latent TGF- was used as previously described.25,27 At the end of the experiment, gel area was assessed using Image Laboratory 3.0 software to measure the contractile activity of fibroblasts. Subsequently, each collagen pad was divided in half and used for analysis of MMP activity by gelatin zymography and for gene expres- sion studies by quantitative PCR. Isolation and Stimulation of Mouse Splenic Macrophages Splenic macrophages were isolated from WT mice using immuno- magnetic bead sorting for CD11b as previously described.28 Stimulation of Mouse Cardiac Microvascular Endothelial Cells Mouse cardiac microvascular endothelial cells (MCMECs) were pur- chased from Cell Biologics and were stimulated with TSP-1 to assess expression of angiogenesis-related genes. Statistical Analysis Data are expressed as means SEM. Statistical analysis was per- formed using unpaired, 2-tailed Student t test or nonparametric t test for non-Gaussian distributions (Mann Whitney) and 1-way ANOVA with Tukey multiple comparison test or nonparametric ANOVA (Kruskal Wallis) for non-Gaussian distributions. Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 6.0 software. P<0.05 was considered to be significant. Mortality was compared using the log-rank test. Results Cardiac Fibrosis in db/db Mice Is Associated With TSP-1 Upregulation Obese diabetic db/db mice exhibited cardiac fibrosis. At 2 months of age, db/db animals had higher myocardial col- lagen I mRNA expression compared with lean WT animals (Figure 1A). At 6 months of age, myocardial collagen content, measured through a hydroxyproline biochemical assay, was significantly higher in db/db animals (Figure 1B). Sirius red staining identified collagen fibers in the myocardium showing expansion of the cardiac interstitium and extensive deposition of collagen in db/db mouse hearts (Figure 1C and 1D). Cardiac fibrosis in db/db animals was associated with significant TSP- 1 mRNA upregulation (Figure 1E). Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated low levels of TSP-1 immunoreactiv- ity in WT mice (Figure 1F); in contrast, db/db animals had intense TSP-1 staining in perivascular and interstitial areas (Figure 1G). TSP-1 / mice were used as negative controls and had no myocardial staining for TSP-1 (Figure 1H). Weight Gain and Adiposity in db/db TSP-1 / Mice To study the role of TSP-1 in fibrotic remodeling of the db/ db heart, we generated dbTSP mice. During a 12-month fol- low-up, mortality was comparable between db/db and dbTSP Figure 1. Cardiac fibrosis in the db/db myocardium is associated with thrombospondin (TSP)-1 upregulation. A to D, db/db mice had significant fibrotic remodeling of the myocardium. Quantitative PCR analysis showed marked upregulation of collagen I mRNA in db/db hearts at 2 months of age (A). A hydroxyproline biochemical assay showed that 6-month-old db/db mice had significantly higher myocardial collagen content when compared with age-matched wild-type (WT) animals (B). Sirius red staining shows increased deposition of collagen in the cardiac interstitium of db/db animals (D), when compared with lean WT mice (C). E, Quantitative PCR shows that TSP-1 mRNA expression was markedly increased in db/db hearts. F and G, Immunohistochemical staining of 6-month-old mouse hearts showed weak immunoreactivity in lean WT mice (F). In contrast, in the db/db myocardium, intense TSP-1 staining was noted (G) and was predominantly localized in perivascular and interstitial areas (arrows). TSP-1 / mice showed negligible staining for TSP-1 (H); *P<0.05 vs WT; **P<0.01 vs WT. Scale bar, 50 m. Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 1334 Circulation Research December 6, 2013 mice (Figure 2A). In db/db mice, TSP-1 loss was associat- ed with an increase in body weight at 4 months of age that was statistically significant only for male mice; in contrast, mouse length was comparable between groups (Figure 2B and 2C). Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry analysis showed that in db/db mice TSP-1 disruption did not affect lean weight (Figure 2D), but resulted in a modest increase in total fat weight (Figure 2E) and abdominal fat weight (Figure 2F) in both male and female animals. However, no sex-specific dif- ferences in weight and fat gain were noted between 2 and 4 months of age (Online Table II), and the percentage of total and abdominal fat content in db/db animals was not affected by TSP-1 loss (Figure 2G and 2H). Effects of TSP-1 Loss on the Metabolic Profile in db/db Mice Next, we examined whether TSP-1 loss had an effect on the development of metabolic dysfunction in db/db mice. At 2 months of age, db/db and dbTSP mice had comparable plasma glucose and insulin levels; HOMA IR was also not significantly different between groups (Figure 3A 3C). TSP-1 disruption in db/db animals was associated with a significant increase in plasma cholesterol levels (Figure 3D). However, plasma glycerol, free fatty acids, and triglycerides were not significantly affected by TSP-1 loss (Figure 3E 3G). Plasma levels of the adipokines leptin and adiponectin were also com- parable between db/db and dbTSP mice (Figure 3H and 3I). dbTSP Mice Exhibit Nonprogressive Ventricular Dilation Accompanied by Modest Systolic Dysfunction Because cardiac TSP-1 upregulation may play a role in remod- eling of the diabetic heart, we examined the effects of TSP- 1 loss on function and geometry of db/db heart. As they age, db/db mice exhibit marked cardiac hypertrophy in the absence of significant systolic dysfunction. At 4 to 12 months of age, dbTSP mice had increased left ventricular dimensions and volumes when compared with db/db animals (Figure 4A and Figure 2. Effects of thrombospondin (TSP)-1 loss on survival, weight gain, and adiposity of db/db mice. A, db/db and db/db TSP-1 / mice had comparable survival curves after 12 months of follow-up. B, TSP-1 loss did not affect mouse size (length). C, TSP-1 loss had subtle sex-specific effects on weight gain in db/db mice. At 4 months of age, male db/db TSP-1 / animals (dbT) had significantly increased body weight; however, in female mice no statistically significant difference was noted between db/db and db/db TSP-1 / animals. D, Lean weight was comparable between groups. E and F, At 4 months of age, TSP-1 loss was associated with increased fat weight in male db/db mice and with higher abdominal fat weight in both male and female animals. G and H, However, fat percent content was comparable between db/db and db/db TSP-1 / mice. *P<0.05 and **P<0.01 vs corresponding db/db mice. Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 Gonzalez-Quesada et al TSP-1 in Diabetic Cardiomyopathy 1335 4B; Online Table II), suggesting that TSP-1 absence induces chamber dilation. At 4 months of age, dbTSP mice had mildly depressed systolic function, evidenced by a reduction in ejec- tion fraction (Figure 4C; Online Table II). However, systolic dysfunction in dbTSP mice was not progressive; at later time points, ejection fraction was not affected by TSP-1 loss. dbTSP animals also had lower LV mass compared with db/db mice and reduced anterior and posterior wall thickness, suggesting attenuated cardiac hypertrophy (Figure 4D and 4F). When Compared With db/db Hearts, dbTSP Hearts Exhibit Delayed Responses to Dobutamine We studied the effects of TSP-1 loss on contractile reserve in dobutamine-stimulated isolated working hearts. Lean WT and TSP-1 / mouse hearts had comparable systolic and dia- stolic function at baseline and on stimulation with dobutamine (Online Table III). At 6 months of age, db/db mice and dbTSP animals had no evidence of systolic dysfunction; baseline dp/dtmax and left ventricular developed pressure were com- parable between WT, db/db, and dbTSP hearts (Figure 4G and 4H). During dobutamine infusion, db/db mice and WT animals had comparable increases in systolic contractile func- tion. On infusion of low-dose dobutamine (7.5 ng/minute), dbTSP hearts exhibited a trend toward a blunted contractile response, evidenced by lower dp/dtmax and left ventricular de- veloped pressure (Figure 4I and 4J). Moreover, with high dos- es of dobutamine infusion (37.5 75 ng/minute), dbTSP hearts had a marked temporal delay in mounting a peak contractile response (Figure 4K). Effects of TSP-1 Loss on the Development of Diastolic Dysfunction in the db/db Heart Diastolic function was compared between WT, db/db, and dbTSP mice by assessing left atrial size, by performing mitral inflow Doppler echocardiography, and through hemodynamic assessment of the isolated perfused heart. At 6 months of age, db/db mice had increased left atrial size compared with WT animals. TSP-1 loss in db/db animals was associated with a reduction in left atrial dimensions (Figure 4G). Mitral inflow Doppler echocardiography showed that, compared with WT mice, db/db animals had a reduced E/A ratio; however, TSP-1 loss did not significantly affect the E/A ratio in db/db mice Figure 3. Effects of thrombospondin (TSP)-1 loss on the metabolic profile in db/db mice. Serum glucose (A), insulin (B), HOMA IR (C), glycerol (E), triglyceride (F), free fatty acids (FFA) (G), leptin (H), and adiponectin (I) levels were comparable between db/db and dbTSP animals at 2 months of age. However, TSP-1 loss was associated with an increase in serum cholesterol levels (D). *P<0.05 vs db/db mice. Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 1336 Circulation Research December 6, 2013 Figure 4. Thrombospondin (TSP)-1 loss in db/db mice results in dilative cardiac remodeling and decreased left ventricular wall thickness. Echocardiographic imaging showed that db/db TSP-1 / mice (dbTSP) had increased left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (LVEDD; A) and left ventricular end-diastolic volume (LVEDV; B) when compared with db/db animals (db), suggesting increased dilative remodeling; *P<0.05, **P<0.01 vs age-matched db/db mice; db/db, n=14; dbTSP, n=19). C, At 4 months of age, systolic function was mildly depressed in dbTSP mice; however, loss of TSP-1 did not cause prolonged or progressive systolic ventricular dysfunction. D to F, TSP-1 absence in db/db animals attenuated cardiac hypertrophy leading to reductions in left ventricular mass (D), anterior wall end- diastolic thickness (AWT; E), and posterior wall end-diastolic thickness (PWT; F). G, At 6 months of age, db/db mice had significantly increased left atrial area when compared with wild-type (WT) animals; **P<0.01. TSP-1 loss significantly abrogated the increase in LA size observed in diabetic animals. H, Mitral inflow Doppler echocardiography showed that db/db animal had a significant reduction in the E/A ratio, suggesting impaired relaxation; *P<0.05 vs WT. TSP-1 loss did not affect the E/A ratio in lean or obese mice. I to L, Assessment of left ventricular contractile reserve in a Langendorff model demonstrated that at 6 months of age obese diabetic db/db mice and WT lean animals had no difference in systolic function, assessed through measurements of dp/dtmax (I) and left ventricular developed pressure (LVDP; J), both at baseline and after infusion of dobutamine. TSP-1 loss did not significantly affect systolic function in db/db mice; only trends toward reduced LVDP and dp/dtmax were observed with low-dose dobutamine infusion. However, TSP-1 loss in db/db mice significantly delayed the peak systolic response after dobutamine infusion (K). L, Diastolic function, measured through assessment of dp/dtmin was not significantly affected by TSP-1 loss; **P<0.01 vs baseline dp/dtmin. Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 Gonzalez-Quesada et al TSP-1 in Diabetic Cardiomyopathy 1337 (Figure 4H). Assessment of diastolic function in isolated per- fused hearts showed that dp/dtmax was comparable between db/db and dbTSP animals (Figure 4L). Thus, TSP-1 absence was not associated with consistent evidence of altered diastol- ic function in diabetic animals. dbTSP Mice Exhibit Reduced Myocardial Collagen Content and Increased MMP Activation Next, we explored the basis for dilative remodeling in dbTSP hearts. Because the extracellular matrix plays a key role in determining cardiac geometry, we stud- ied the effects of TSP-1 loss on cardiac matrix metabo- lism. Using a hydroxyproline assay, we demonstrated that db/db hearts have increased myocardial collagen deposition; TSP-1 loss significantly reduced collagen content in db/db animals (Figure 5A). Reduced collagen content in dbTSP hearts was not because of lower collagen mRNA synthesis (Figure 5B) but was associated with marked increases in MMP activity. dbTSP mice had a 2-fold increase in MMP-2 activity and a 5-fold increase in MMP-9 activity when com- pared with db/db animals (Figure 5C 5E). Increased prote- ase activity in the absence of TSP-1 was not associated with increased MMP mRNA or protein levels. Quantitative PCR showed that myocardial MMP-2 and MMP-9 mRNA levels were comparable between db/db and dbTSP mice (Figure 5F and 5G). Moreover, Western blotting demonstrated that db/ db and dbTSP mice had comparable myocardial MMP-2 and MMP-9 protein levels (Online Figure I). Dilation and Increased Matrix Remodeling in dbTSP Mice Is Not Because of Impaired TGF- Activation TGF- promotes matrix preservation and critically regulates cardiac remodeling.29 Because TSP-1 is an essential activa- tor of TGF- , we hypothesized that the effects of TSP-1 dis- ruption in db/db hearts may be because of impaired TGF- signaling. When compared with WT animals, db/db mice had significantly increased myocardial expression of p-Smad2 and Figure 5. Dilative remodeling of the thrombospondin (TSP)-1 deficient db/db heart is associated with decreased collagen content and enhanced matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity. A, Assessment of collagen content using a hydroxyproline biochemical assay demonstrated that TSP-1 loss significantly reduced collagen content in 6-month-old db/db animals; *P<0.05 vs db/db; db/db, n=8 per group. B, Reduced collagen content was not associated with attenuated collagen mRNA levels; myocardial collagen I mRNA levels were higher in db/db TSP-1 / (dbTSP) hearts. C to E, Zymography showed that TSP-1 absence resulted in significantly increased MMP-2 and MMP-9 activity in db/db animals; *P<0.05 vs wild-type (WT); **P<0.01 vs WT; ^^P<0.01 vs db/db. F and G, Enhanced MMP activity in dbTSP hearts was not associated with increased MMP-2 or MMP-9 mRNA levels. Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 1338 Circulation Research December 6, 2013 p-Smad3, suggesting activation of the TGF- /small mothers against decapendaplegic (Smad) signaling pathway. p-Smad2 and p-Smad3 expression was comparable between db/db and dbTSP mice (Figure 6A 6C), suggesting that TSP-1 loss does not affect activation of canonical TGF- signaling. Moreover, db/db and dbTSP mice had comparable expression of TGF- 1 mRNA in the myocardium (Figure 6D). Dilation of dbTSP Heart Is Not Because of Accentuated Inflammation Proinflammatory mediators, such as interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor- , mediate cardiac dilation and dysfunction by inducing and activating MMPs. Because TSP-1 down- modulates proinflammatory responses, we examined whether dilation and accentuated matrix metabolism in dbTSP hearts is because of increased inflammatory activity. Myocardial expression of the proinflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor- and interleukin-1 (Figure 6E and 6F), and of the che- mokines monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 and interferon- inducible protein-10 (Figure 6G and 6H), was comparable between db/db and dbTSP mice, suggesting that TSP-1 loss does not affect inflammatory activity in db/db mice. Cardiac Fibroblasts Harvested From dbTSP Mice Exhibit Attenuated Matrix Synthetic Capacity To explore the basis for accentuated matrix-degrading activity in the absence of TSP-1, we isolated cardiac fibroblasts from db/db and dbTSP hearts and compared baseline expression of genes associated with matrix synthesis and metabolism. dbTSP fibroblasts had reduced collagen I and III mRNA ex- pression and showed trends for increased expression of MMP- 2 and MMP-3 mRNA (Figure 7A 7D). Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 and TIMP-2 mRNA expression was comparable between groups (Figure 7E). Altered expres- sion of genes associated with matrix metabolism in dbTSP cardiac fibroblasts was not associated with impaired activation of TGF- /Smad signaling. Western blotting demonstrated that p-Smad2 expression was comparable between fibroblasts iso- lated from db/db and dbTSP hearts (Figure 7F). When Bound to the Matrix, TSP-1 Does Not Activate TGF- Responses But Enhances Matrix Preservation, Inhibiting Leptin-Induced MMP Activation As a matricellular protein, TSP-1 modulates cellular pheno- type when bound to the structural matrix. Accordingly, we tested the hypothesis that incorporation of TSP-1 into the ma- trix may induce a matrix-preserving phenotype in cardiac fi- broblasts using a cell biological assay of fibroblast-populated collagen pads in the presence or absence of TSP-1. Because TSP-1 is considered an essential activator of TGF- , we ex- amined whether incorporation of TSP-1 into the matrix pro- motes TGF- mediated actions in fibroblasts stimulated with latent TGF- . Active, but not latent, TGF- induced gel con- traction in fibroblast-populated collagen pads (Figure 7G), reflecting the prominent effects of the growth factor on myo- fibroblast transdifferentiation. Incorporation of TSP-1 into the matrix had no effect on gel contraction, both in the pres- ence or absence of latent TGF- (Figure 7G), suggesting that TSP-1 exerts no significant TGF- activating effects in this model. Whereas, leptin stimulation induced modest, but sig- nificant, gel contraction in the presence or absence of TSP-1 (Figure 7H). Zymography demonstrated that leptin markedly enhanced MMP-2 activity in fibroblast-populated collagen pads (Figure 7I). When incorporated into the matrix, TSP-1 attenuated the matrix-degrading effects of leptin. The effects of leptin and TSP-1 on MMP-2 activity were not because of modulation of MMP-2 mRNA levels (Figure 7J). Because membrane-type MMP-1 and TIMP-2 are implicated in MMP- 2 activation, we examined whether they are involved in Figure 6. Thrombospondin (TSP)-1 deficiency does not affect myocardial inflammation and activation of TGF- /Smad signaling in the db/db myocardium. A to C, Western blotting showed that myocardial expression of phosphorylated Smad2 (A) and phosphorylated Smad3 (B) was significantly increased in db/db animals when compared with lean wild-type mice. db/db TSP-1 / (dbTSP) mice had comparable myocardial p-Smad2 levels and showed a trend toward increased pSmad3 expression when compared with db/db mice. Moreover, db/db and dbTSP mice had comparable myocardial mRNA expression of the cytokines transforming growth factor (TGF)- (D), tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- (E), interleukin (IL)-1 (F), and the chemokines monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1/CCL2 (G) and interferon- inducible protein (IP)-10/CXCL10 (H; n=8 mice per group). Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 Gonzalez-Quesada et al TSP-1 in Diabetic Cardiomyopathy 1339 mediating the inhibitory effects of TSP-1 on MMP-2 activity. We found that leptin and TSP-1 had no effects on fibroblast- derived membrane-type MMP-1 and TIMP-2 mRNA synthe- sis (Figure 7K and 7L). TSP-1 Loss Abrogates Capillary, But Not Arteriolar, Rarefaction in db/db Mice Through its potent angiostatic effects, TSP-1 may be respon- sible for impaired angiogenesis in the diabetic heart. To study the effects of TSP-1 loss on the microvascular network in dia- betic hearts, we compared vascular density between db/db and dbTSP animals. At 6 and 12 months of age, db/db mice exhib- ited significantly lower capillary and arteriolar density when compared with WT animals (Figure 8A and 8B). TSP-1 dis- ruption attenuated capillary rarefaction in db/db animals but had no significant effect on arteriolar density (Figure 8A 8E). TSP-1 Mediates Myocardial Angiopoietin-2 Upregulation in db/db Mice Angiogenesis is regulated through dynamic interactions between vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and angiopoietins.30 Because diabetes mellitus is associated with overexpression of angiopoietin-2, a mediator that promotes vascular regression,31,32 we examined whether attenuation of capillary rarefaction in dbTSP mice is as- sociated with reduced angiopoietin-2 expression. Western blotting showed that 12-month-old db/db mice had sig- nificantly higher myocardial angiopoietin-2 expression compared with WT animals (Figure 8G). TSP-1 absence markedly reduced myocardial angiopoietin-2 expression in 6- and 12-month-old animals (Figure 8F and 8G). In con- trast, TSP-1 loss did not affect myocardial VEGF protein expression (Online Figure II). TSP-1 Stimulation Upregulates Angiopoietin-2 Expression in Macrophages We next examined whether TSP-1 directly induces angio- poietin-2 expression. In isolated mouse macrophages, TSP- 1 stimulation increased angiopoietin-2 mRNA synthesis (Figure 8H). Moreover, cardiac fibroblasts harvested from db/ db mice showed increased angiopoietin-2 mRNA expression; Figure 7. Matrix-preserving effects of thrombospondin (TSP)-1 in isolated cardiac fibroblasts. Cardiac fibroblasts isolated from db/db TSP-1 / hearts had reduced collagen I (A) and III (B) mRNA expression and showed trends toward increased matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 (C) and MMP-3 (D) synthesis when compared with fibroblasts harvested from db/db hearts. In contrast, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 mRNA synthesis (E) and expression of p-Smad2 protein (F) was comparable between db/db and dbTSP fibroblasts. G, In fibroblasts populating collagen pads, incorporation of TSP-1 into the matrix did not activate TGF- responses. Active TGF- (aTGF) induced marked gel contraction in fibroblast-populated pads, reflecting myofibroblast transdif ferentiation. In contrast, TSP-1 incorporation into the pad failed to increase the effects of latent TGF- (lTGFbeta) on gel contraction, suggesting that in this model TSP-1 cannot activate TGF- . H, Leptin stimulation modestly, but significantly, increased gel contraction in fibroblast-populated pads. TSP-1 did not affect the effects of leptin on gel contraction. I, In fibroblast-populated collagen pads, TSP-1 incorporation into the matrix abrogated the stimulatory effects of leptin on MMP-2 activity. J to L, Inhibitory actions of TSP-1 on MMP-2 activation were not because of modulation of MMP-2 (J), membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MT1-MMP; K), and TIMP-2 (L) synthesis (n=6 per experimental condition). Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 1340 Circulation Research December 6, 2013 Figure 8. Thrombospondin (TSP)-1 upregulates angiopoietin-2 and mediates capillary rarefaction in the db/db myocardium. A to C, Myocardial capillaries were identified using staining with the endothelial cell marker CD31. Representative images of stained sections from 6-month-old wild-type (WT; A), db/db (B), and db/bb TSP-1 / (dbTSP; C) hearts are shown. D, Quantitative analysis demonstrated that db/db hearts exhibited significant reduction in vascular density at 6 and 12 months of age; ^^P<0.01 vs corresponding WT mice. dbTSP mice were partially protected from microvascular loss; **P<0.01 vs db/db. E, Myocardial arterioles were identified using -SMA staining. Quantitative analysis showed that db/db mice had reduced myocardial arteriolar density when compared with WT animals; *P<0.05 vs WT. However, TSP-1 absence did not affect the progression of arteriolar loss in db/db mice (6-month group: WT, n=7; db/db, n=12; dbTSP, n=5; 12-month group: WT, n=10; db/db, n=12; dbTSP, n=5). F and G, TSP-1 mediates angiopoietin-2 upregulation in the db/db heart. Western blotting was used to measure myocardial angiopoietin-2 expression levels in 6-month-old (F) and 12-month-old (G) animals. At 12 months of age, db/db mice exhibited marked myocardial angiopoietin-2 upregulation; *P<0.05 vs WT. dbTSP-1 mice had significantly reduced myocardial angiopoietin-2 expression when compared with age-matched db/db animals; ^P<0.05, ^^P<0.01 vs db/db. H, In splenic macrophages, TSP-1 stimulation for 4 hours significantly upregulated angiopoietin-2 mRNA synthesis; *P<0.05 vs control; n=6. I, Cardiac fibroblasts harvested from db/db mice had significantly increased angiopoietin-2 mRNA expression levels; TSP-1 loss abrogated the increase in angiopoietin-2 synthesis; **P<0.01 vs WT; ^P<0.05 vs db/db; n=6; scalebar, 40 m. Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 Gonzalez-Quesada et al TSP-1 in Diabetic Cardiomyopathy 1341 the increase in angiopoietin-2 levels was abrogated in cells isolated from dbTSP hearts (Figure 8I). In contrast, TSP-1 had no effect on macrophage-derived VEGF-A mRNA synthesis, and TSP-1 loss did not affect VEGF-A mRNA expression by db/db cardiac fibroblasts. Mouse cardiac microvascular endo- thelial cells constitutively expressed VEGF-A mRNA but did not express angiopoietin-2 in the presence or absence of TSP- 1 (Online Figure III). Discussion Our study provides the first direct evidence supporting the role of the prototypical matricellular protein TSP-1 in matrix remod- eling and regulation of angiogenesis in the diabetic heart. We report several novel observations: (1) Diabetic cardiac fibrosis is associated with marked TSP-1 upregulation and deposition in the cardiac interstitium. (2) In the diabetic heart, TSP-1 exerts matrix-preserving actions preventing dilative remodeling. (3) The matrix-preserving effects of TSP-1 seem to be due to di- rect actions on MMP activation and not to activation of TGF- signaling. (4) TSP-1 induction in the diabetic heart upregulates angiopoietin-2 expression, exerting potent angiostatic actions and mediating rarefaction of the capillary network. The development of interstitial and perivascular fibrosis is a consistent characteristic of diabetic cardiomyopathy.6 In nonhypertensive patients with familial diabetes mellitus, increased collagen deposition was noted in the cardiac peri- vascular and interstitial space.33 Fibrotic cardiac remodeling in subjects with diabetes mellitus has important functional implications and may be involved in the pathogenesis of diastolic dysfunction. In patients with early type 2 diabetes, collagen synthesis, assessed through measurement of serum levels of the carboxy-terminal propeptide of procollagen type I, correlated with the severity of diastolic impairment.34 Animal models of type 2 diabetes also exhibit significant cardiac fibrosis. Using quantitative PCR, histochemical staining, and a hydroxyproline biochemical assay, we found that obese diabetic db/db mice exhibit a marked increase in myocardial collagen content (Figure 1). Collagen deposition in the db/db heart is associated with marked TSP-1 upregu- lation. We localized TSP-1 immunoreactivity in vascular cells and in perivascular areas, suggesting that endothelial cells and pericytes may be important sources of TSP-1 in the diabetic myocardium (Figure 1). Hyperglycemia is a potent inducer of TSP-1 in both endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells35 and may mediate TSP-1 upregulation in the db/db heart. Glucose-mediated activation of the hexosamine pathway induces TSP-1 upregulation in vascular smooth muscle cells.36 A similar mechanism for glucose-induced TSP-1 upregulation is operative in endothelial cells37; how- ever, the transcription factors activated by high glucose seem to be cell type specific.35 What is the function of TSP-1 in the diabetic myocar- dium? Systematic assessment of cardiac dimensions and function in dbTSP mice demonstrated that TSP-1 plays an important role in preservation of the geometry of the diabetic heart. As they age, db/db mice develop cardiac hypertrophy with preserved left ventricular chamber di- mensions. TSP-1 loss in db/db mice was associated with a 20% increase in left ventricular end-diastolic volume, reflecting significant dilative remodeling of the ventricle. Dilation of the left ventricle in dbTSP mice was associ- ated with modest, nonprogressive systolic dysfunction and impairment of contractile reserve (Figure 4). Dilation and dysfunction of the dbTSP heart was associated with sig- nificant loss of myocardial collagen and increased MMP activity (Figure 5). Taken together, these findings suggest that loss of TSP-1 deprives the db/db myocardium from an important matrix-preserving signal leading to geometric re- modeling of the ventricle. TSP-1 may exert matrix-preserving actions through sev- eral distinct pathways. First, as a potent activator of TGF- ,38 TSP-1 may enhance growth factor activity in the cardiac interstitium, promoting matrix deposition and increasing ex- pression of protease inhibitors such as TIMP-1. To test this hypothesis, we measured activation of the profibrotic, ca- nonical TGF- /Smad pathway by assessing Smad2/3 phos- phorylation in the myocardium. db/db mice had markedly increased myocardial p-Smad2 and p-Smad3 expression; however, TSP-1 disruption did not affect TGF- /Smad acti- vation. Moreover, in an in vitro model using collagen pads populated with cardiac fibroblasts, incorporation of TSP-1 in the collagenous matrix did not stimulate gel contraction and did not upregulate TGF- inducible genes in cells stimulated with latent TGF- . These observations suggest that the ma- trix-preserving actions of TSP-1 in the remodeling diabetic heart are not because of TGF- activating effects. Second, TSP-1 may preserve the matrix by attenuating the inflamma- tory response, thus preventing cytokine-induced protease syn- thesis and activation. However, TSP-1 absence in db/db mice did not affect myocardial cytokine and chemokine synthesis, suggesting that overactive inflammation is not responsible for the increased chamber dilation in db/db TSP-1 / hearts. Third, TSP-1 may directly inhibit MMP activity.39 TSP-1 loss in db/db mice was associated with a 2-fold increase in myo- cardial MMP-2 activity and a 5-fold increase in MMP-9 ac- tivity (Figure 5). In vitro, TSP-1 incorporation into the matrix inhibited leptin-induced MMP-2 activation; the inhibitory effects of TSP-1 on MMP activity were not because of tran- scriptional regulation of MMPs (Figure 6). Thus, our in vivo and in vitro observations suggest that the matrix-preserving actions of TSP-1 in the diabetic heart are likely because of direct inhibition of protease activity and may not involve activation of growth factors that stimulate matrix synthesis, such as TGF- . In addition to its effects in matrix metabolism, TSP-1 is also involved in regulation of myocardial angiogenesis in diabetic mice. In both human patients and in experimental animal models, diabetes mellitus is associated with impaired angiogenesis. Patients with diabetes mellitus exhibit attenu- ated angiogenic responses to myocardial ischemia40 and have poor development of collateral coronary vessels.41 Moreover, microvascular rarefaction is a characteristic of the diabetic heart and may be responsible for development of contractile dysfunction and for increased susceptibility to myocardial ischemia.42,43 The molecular signals responsible for impaired angiogenesis in subjects with diabetes mellitus remain poorly understood; animal model studies and investigations in human Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 1342 Circulation Research December 6, 2013 patients have produced somewhat conflicting results. In dia- betic animals, expression of angiogenic growth factors (such as hypoxia-inducible factor-1 and VEGF) was reduced, sug- gesting that diabetes mellitus associated impairment in the angiogenic response may be because of attenuation of growth factor synthesis.40 In contrast, in human patients with coronary disease and type 2 diabetes, myocardial VEGF levels were increased; however, VEGF receptor phosphorylation was reduced and downstream myocardial VEGF signaling was impaired, contributing to reduced angiogenesis.44 A potential mechanism of impaired angiogenesis in diabetes mellitus may involve activation of angiostatic pathways. Our findings sug- gest that upregulation of the angiostatic matricellular protein TSP-1 is in part responsible for the age-related rarefaction of the cardiac microvascular network in db/db hearts (Figure 8). Published evidence suggests that the antiangiogenic effects of TSP-1 may involve several distinct biological processes.45 First, TSP-1 may antagonize VEGF signaling through direct binding and inhibition of its release from the matrix and via inhibition of VEGF receptor phosphorylation.46 Second, TSP- 1 may induce endothelial cell apoptosis through a CD36/ fyn-mediated pathway.19 Third, TSP-1 may directly suppress endothelial cell cycle progression in a CD36-independent manner or inhibit endothelial cell migration through interac- tions involving 1 integrins.47 Fourth, TSP-1 induced sup- pression of NO signaling may also be involved in activation of angiostatic signaling48 in endothelial cells. Our experiments identified angiopoietin-2 induction as a new mechanism that may be implicated in the angiostatic actions of TSP-1 in the diabetic myocardium. Angiopoietin-2 potently regulates an- giogenesis in a context-dependent manner. Angiopoietin-2 promotes endothelial cell death if endogenous VEGF activity is inhibited49 and promotes vascular regression by inhibiting pericyte recruitment.50 We show that angiopoietin-2 protein is upregulated in db/db hearts; loss of TSP-1 is associated with marked reduction of angiopoietin-2 levels (Figure 8). Thus, the angiostatic effects of TSP-1 in the diabetic myocardium may be in part because of upregulation of angiopoietin-2 ex- pression, in an environment where VEGF signaling is also attenuated (Online Figure II). Our in vitro experiments dem- onstrated cell-specific stimulatory effects of TSP-1 on angio- poietin-2 expression. TSP-1 induced angiopoietin-2 synthesis in macrophages, but not in cardiac microvascular endothelial cells (Figure 8). In addition to its role in tissue remodeling, angiogenesis, and fibrosis, TSP-1 has been recently identified as an adi- pokine that is highly expressed in fat tissue harvested from obese, insulin-resistant subjects and is associated with adi- pose inflammation.21 Our recent work demonstrated that TSP-1 / mice have attenuated fat accumulation and reduced weight gain when fed a high-fat diet or a high- carbohydrate low-fat diet51 and suggested effects of TSP-1 in promoting adipose tissue inflammation and adipocyte proliferation. Li et al52 also showed that TSP-1 / mice fed a high-fat diet ex- hibited reduced adipose inflammation and improved insulin sensitivity. In contrast, Olerud et al53 found that TSP-1 / mice were glucose-intolerant because of islet dysfunction; reconstitution of the TGF- activating effects of TSP-1 prevented the development of insulin resistance in TSP-1 / mice. In our current study, db/db mice that lacked TSP-1 had only subtle alterations in adipose tissue gain and in metabolic function when compared with db/db animals. The percentage of total and abdominal fat, glucose, in- sulin levels, and HOMA IR were not significantly af- fected by TSP-1 loss; however, db/db TSP-1 / mice had higher serum cholesterol levels compared with db/db animals. The differences in the findings be- tween investigations may reflect the distinct mecha- nisms of obesity in various experimental models. db/db mice develop morbid obesity and severe metabolic dys- function because of central nervous system leptin resis- tance that results in hyperphagia and rapid weight gain; the very high caloric intake in these animals may induce meta- bolic dysfunction regardless of the presence or absence of TSP-1. An alternative possibility is that any effects of TSP- 1 on metabolic function may require intact leptin signaling. Conclusions TSP-1 does not play a significant role in weight gain and metabolic dysfunction in db/db mice, but is highly induced in the db/db myocardium where it exerts matrix-preserving and angiostatic actions. TSP-1 mediated matrix preservation protects the diabetic heart from dilation by locally inhibiting MMP activity; however, dilative remodeling in the absence of TSP-1 is not progressive and is associated with mild systolic dysfunction. In addition to its effects in maintaining chamber geometry, TSP-1 exerts potent angiostatic actions mediating vascular rarefaction in the aging diabetic heart. Because the antiangiogenic effects of TSP-1 are mediated through binding of specific angiostatic domains with CD36 or CD47,45,54 selec- tive inhibition of the angiostatic effects of TSP-1 may be a promising approach to correct impaired angiogenic responses in the diabetic myocardium. Sources of Funding Supported by National Institutes of Health grants R01HL76246, R01HL85440, T32HL007675, and Wilf Family Cardiovascular Research Institute. Disclosures None. References 1. Marwick TH. Diabetic heart disease. Heart. 2006;92:296 300. 2. Abel ED, Litwin SE, Sweeney G. Cardiac remodeling in obesity. Physiol Rev. 2008;88:389 419. 3. Kannel WB, Hjortland M, Castelli WP. Role of diabetes in congestive heart failure: the Framingham study. Am J Cardiol. 1974;34:29 34. 4. Rubler S, Dlugash J, Yuceoglu YZ, Kumral T, Branwood AW, Grishman A. New type of cardiomyopathy associated with diabetic glomerulosclerosis. Am J Cardiol. 1972;30:595 602. 5. Asbun J, Villarreal FJ. The pathogenesis of myocardial fibrosis in the setting of diabetic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47: 693 700. 6. Boudina S, Abel ED. Diabetic cardiomyopathy, causes and effects. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2010;11:31 39. 7. Fischer VW, Barner HB, Larose LS. Pathomorphologic aspects of muscu- lar tissue in diabetes mellitus. Hum Pathol. 1984;15:1127 1136. 8. Law B, Fowlkes V, Goldsmith JG, Carver W, Goldsmith EC. Diabetes- induced alterations in the extracellular matrix and their impact on myocar- dial function. Microsc Microanal. 2012;18:22 34. Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 Gonzalez-Quesada et al TSP-1 in Diabetic Cardiomyopathy 1343 9. Uusitupa MI, Mustonen JN, Airaksinen KE. Diabetic heart muscle dis- ease. Ann Med. 1990;22:377 386. 10. Bornstein P. Matricellular proteins: an overview. J Cell Commun Signal. 2009;3:163 165. 11. Schellings MW, Pinto YM, Heymans S. Matricellular proteins in the heart: possible role during stress and remodeling. Cardiovasc Res. 2004;64:24 31. 12. Frangogiannis NG. Matricellular proteins in cardiac adaptation and dis- ease. Physiol Rev. 2012;92:635 688. 13. Goldsmith EC, Bradshaw AD, Spinale FG. Contributory pathways leading to myocardial fibrosis: moving beyond collagen expression. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012; 304:C393 C402. 14. Jugdutt BI, Jelani A, Palaniyappan A, Idikio H, Uweira RE, Menon V, Jugdutt CE. Aging-related early changes in markers of ventricular and ma- trix remodeling after reperfused ST-segment elevation myocardial infarc- tion in the canine model: effect of early therapy with an angiotensin II type 1 receptor blocker. Circulation. 2010;122:341 351. 15. Frangogiannis NG, Ren G, Dewald O, Zymek P, Haudek S, Koerting A, Winkelmann K, Michael LH, Lawler J, Entman ML. Critical role of en- dogenous thrombospondin-1 in preventing expansion of healing myocar- dial infarcts. Circulation. 2005;111:2935 2942. 16. Xia Y, Dobaczewski M, Gonzalez-Quesada C, Chen W, Biernacka A, Li N, Lee DW, Frangogiannis NG. Endogenous thrombospondin 1 protects the pressure-overloaded myocardium by modulating fibroblast phenotype and matrix metabolism. Hypertension. 2011;58:902 911. 17. Ren B, Yee KO, Lawler J, Khosravi-Far R. Regulation of tumor angiogen- esis by thrombospondin-1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006;1765:178 188. 18. Iruela-Arispe ML, Lombardo M, Krutzsch HC, Lawler J, Roberts DD. Inhibition of angiogenesis by thrombospondin-1 is mediated by 2 indepen- dent regions within the type 1 repeats. Circulation. 1999;100:1423 1431. 19. Jim nez B, Volpert OV, Crawford SE, Febbraio M, Silverstein RL, Bouck N. Signals leading to apoptosis-dependent inhibition of neovascularization by thrombospondin-1. Nat Med. 2000;6:41 48. 20. Stenina OI, Krukovets I, Wang K, Zhou Z, Forudi F, Penn MS, Topol EJ, Plow EF. Increased expression of thrombospondin-1 in vessel wall of dia- betic Zucker rat. Circulation. 2003;107:3209 3215. 21. Varma V, Yao-Borengasser A, Bodles AM, Rasouli N, Phanavanh B, Nolen GT, Kern EM, Nagarajan R, Spencer HJ III, Lee MJ, Fried SK, McGehee RE Jr, Peterson CA, Kern PA. Thrombospondin-1 is an adipokine associ- ated with obesity, adipose inflammation, and insulin resistance. Diabetes. 2008;57:432 439. 22. Park CW, Kim HW, Lim JH, Yoo KD, Chung S, Shin SJ, Chung HW, Lee SJ, Chae CB, Kim YS, Chang YS. Vascular endothelial growth fac- tor inhibition by dRK6 causes endothelial apoptosis, fibrosis, and in- flammation in the heart via the Akt/eNOS axis in db/db mice. Diabetes. 2009;58:2666 2676. 23. Lawler J, Sunday M, Thibert V, Duquette M, George EL, Rayburn H, Hynes RO. Thrombospondin-1 is required for normal murine pulmo- nary homeostasis and its absence causes pneumonia. J Clin Invest. 1998;101:982 992. 24. Zymek P, Bujak M, Chatila K, Cieslak A, Thakker G, Entman ML, Frangogiannis NG. The role of platelet-derived growth factor signaling in healing myocardial infarcts. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:2315 2323. 25. Dobaczewski M, Bujak M, Li N, Gonzalez-Quesada C, Mendoza LH, Wang XF, Frangogiannis NG. Smad3 signaling critically regulates fibro- blast phenotype and function in healing myocardial infarction. Circ Res. 2010;107:418 428. 26. Dobaczewski M, Xia Y, Bujak M, Gonzalez-Quesada C, Frangogiannis NG. CCR5 signaling suppresses inflammation and reduces adverse re- modeling of the infarcted heart, mediating recruitment of regulatory T cells. Am J Pathol. 2010;176:2177 2187. 27. Bujak M, Dobaczewski M, Gonzalez-Quesada C, Xia Y, Leucker T, Zymek P, Veeranna V, Tager AM, Luster AD, Frangogiannis NG. Induction of the CXC chemokine interferon-gamma-inducible protein 10 regulates the reparative response following myocardial infarction. Circ Res. 2009;105:973 983. 28. Chen W, Saxena A, Li N, Sun J, Gupta A, Lee DW, Tian Q, Dobaczewski M, Frangogiannis NG. Endogenous IRAK-M attenuates postinfarction remodeling through effects on macrophages and fibroblasts. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012;32:2598 2608. 29. Dobaczewski M, Chen W, Frangogiannis NG. Transforming growth factor (TGF)- signaling in cardiac remodeling. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011;51:600 606. 30. Holash J, Maisonpierre PC, Compton D, Boland P, Alexander CR, Zagzag D, Yancopoulos GD, Wiegand SJ. Vessel cooption, regression, and growth in tumors mediated by angiopoietins and VEGF. Science. 1999;284:1994 1998. 31. Feng Y, vom Hagen F, Pfister F, Djokic S, Hoffmann S, Back W, Wagner P, Lin J, Deutsch U, Hammes HP. Impaired pericyte recruitment and ab- normal retinal angiogenesis as a result of angiopoietin-2 overexpression. Thromb Haemost. 2007;97:99 108. 32. Cao Y, Sonveaux P, Liu S, Zhao Y, Mi J, Clary BM, Li CY, Kontos CD, Dewhirst MW. Systemic overexpression of angiopoietin-2 promotes tu- mor microvessel regression and inhibits angiogenesis and tumor growth. Cancer Res. 2007;67:3835 3844. 33. Regan TJ, Lyons MM, Ahmed SS, Levinson GE, Oldewurtel HA, Ahmad MR, Haider B. Evidence for cardiomyopathy in familial diabetes mellitus. J Clin Invest. 1977;60:884 899. 34. Ihm SH, Youn HJ, Shin DI, Jang SW, Park CS, Kim PJ, Kim HY, Chang K, Seung KB, Kim JH, Choi KB. Serum carboxy-terminal propeptide of type I procollagen (PIP) is a marker of diastolic dysfunction in patients with early type 2 diabetes mellitus. Int J Cardiol. 2007;122:e36 e38. 35. Raman P, Harry C, Weber M, Krukovets I, Stenina OI. A novel transcrip- tional mechanism of cell type-specific regulation of vascular gene expres- sion by glucose. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011;31:634 642. 36. Raman P, Krukovets I, Marinic TE, Bornstein P, Stenina OI. Glycosylation mediates up-regulation of a potent antiangiogenic and proatherogenic pro- tein, thrombospondin-1, by glucose in vascular smooth muscle cells. J Biol Chem. 2007;282:5704 5714. 37. Dabir P, Marinic TE, Krukovets I, Stenina OI. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor is activated by glucose and regulates the thrombospondin-1 gene promoter in endothelial cells. Circ Res. 2008;102:1558 1565. 38. Crawford SE, Stellmach V, Murphy-Ullrich JE, Ribeiro SM, Lawler J, Hynes RO, Boivin GP, Bouck N. Thrombospondin-1 is a major activator of TGF-beta1 in vivo. Cell. 1998;93:1159 1170. 39. Bein K, Simons M. Thrombospondin type 1 repeats interact with ma- trix metalloproteinase 2. Regulation of metalloproteinase activity. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:32167 32173. 40. Boodhwani M, Sellke FW. Therapeutic angiogenesis in diabetes and hy- percholesterolemia: influence of oxidative stress. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2009;11:1945 1959. 41. Abaci A, O uzhan A, Kahraman S, Eryol NK, Unal S, Arin H, Ergin A. Effect of diabetes mellitus on formation of coronary collateral vessels. Circulation. 1999;99:2239 2242. 42. Chen JX, Zeng H, Reese J, Aschner JL, Meyrick B. Overexpression of angiopoietin-2 impairs myocardial angiogenesis and exacerbates cardiac fibrosis in the diabetic db/db mouse model. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012;302:H1003 H1012. 43. Schiekofer S, Galasso G, Sato K, Kraus BJ, Walsh K. Impaired revascu- larization in a mouse model of type 2 diabetes is associated with dysregu- lation of a complex angiogenic-regulatory network. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005;25:1603 1609. 44. Sasso FC, Torella D, Carbonara O, Ellison GM, Torella M, Scardone M, Marra C, Nasti R, Marfella R, Cozzolino D, Indolfi C, Cotrufo M, Torella R, Salvatore T. Increased vascular endothelial growth factor expression but impaired vascular endothelial growth factor receptor signaling in the myocardium of type 2 diabetic patients with chronic coronary heart dis- ease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;46:827 834. 45. Lawler PR, Lawler J. Molecular basis for the regulation of angiogen- esis by thrombospondin-1 and -2. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012;2:a006627. 46. Zhang X, Kazerounian S, Duquette M, Perruzzi C, Nagy JA, Dvorak HF, Parangi S, Lawler J. Thrombospondin-1 modulates vascular endo- thelial growth factor activity at the receptor level. FASEB J. 2009;23: 3368 3376. 47. Short SM, Derrien A, Narsimhan RP, Lawler J, Ingber DE, Zetter BR. Inhibition of endothelial cell migration by thrombospondin-1 type-1 re- peats is mediated by beta1 integrins. J Cell Biol. 2005;168:643 653. 48. Isenberg JS, Martin-Manso G, Maxhimer JB, Roberts DD. Regulation of nitric oxide signalling by thrombospondin 1: implications for anti-angio- genic therapies. Nat Rev Cancer. 2009;9:182 194. 49. Lobov IB, Brooks PC, Lang RA. Angiopoietin-2 displays VEGF- dependent modulation of capillary structure and endothelial cell survival in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99:11205 11210. 50. Fagiani E, Lorentz P, Kopfstein L, Christofori G. Angiopoietin-1 and -2 exert antagonistic functions in tumor angiogenesis, yet both induce lym- phangiogenesis. Cancer Res. 2011;71:5717 5727. 51. Kong P, Gonzalez-Quesada C, Li N, Cavalera M, Lee DW, Frangogiannis NG. Thrombospondin-1 regulates adiposity and metabolic dysfunc- tion in diet-induced obesity enhancing adipose inflammation and Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023 1344 Circulation Research December 6, 2013 stimulating adipocyte proliferation. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013;305:E439 E450. 52. Li Y, Tong X, Rumala C, Clemons K, Wang S. Thrombospondin1 defi- ciency reduces obesity-associated inflammation and improves insulin sen- sitivity in a diet-induced obese mouse model. PLoS One. 2011;6:e26656. 53. Olerud J, Mokhtari D, Johansson M, Christoffersson G, Lawler J, Welsh N, Carlsson PO. Thrombospondin-1: an islet endothelial cell signal of im- portance for -cell function. Diabetes. 2011;60:1946 1954. 54. Henkin J, Volpert OV. Therapies using anti-angiogenic peptide mimetics of thrombospondin-1. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2011;15:1369 1386. What Is Known? Patients with diabetes mellitus develop diastolic heart failure as- sociated with interstitial fibrosis and exhibit impaired myocardial angiogenesis. Matricellular proteins are critically involved in fibrotic and angiogenic responses by modulating growth factor and cytokine signaling. Hyperglycemia upregulates matricellular protein thrombospondin (TSP)-1, which might play an important role in remodeling of the dia- betic heart by modulating growth factor signaling, inhibiting protease activation, and exerting angiostatic actions. What New Information Does This Article Contribute? Obese diabetic db/db mice exhibit marked upregulation of myocardial TSP-1, which is localized in interstitial and perivascular areas. Upregulation of TSP-1 in the diabetic myocardium increases myocar- dial collagen content, but preserves chamber geometry and systolic function by inhibiting matrix metalloproteinase activation. TSP-1 induction in the diabetic heart mediates age-related capillary rarefaction by upregulating expression of angiopoietin-2. Matricellular protein TSP-1, which is markedly induced in the heart in diabetes mellitus, is implicated in fibrotic cardiac remodeling in diabetes mellitus. Moreover, through its potent angiostatic actions, TSP-1 may be responsible for impaired an- giogenesis in the diabetic myocardium. Obese diabetic db/db mice exhibit marked upregulation of TSP-1 in the myocardium. To investigate the role of TSP-1 in diabetic cardiomyopathy, we generated db/db TSP-1 / mice. Our findings show, for the first time, that: (1) loss of TSP-1 in db/db mice does not significantly affect weight gain and metabolic function; (2) TSP-1 disruption in db/db animals results in cardiac chamber enlargement and modest systolic dysfunction, associated with reduced collagen content and enhanced matrix metalloproteinase activity in the myocardium; (3) effects of TSP-1 on the matrix are not mediated through activation of transforming growth factor- responses, but may reflect inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase activity; (4) TSP-1 mediates age-associated capillary rarefaction in the diabetic heart by upregulating expression of angiopoietin-2, a mediator that induces vascular regression. Our findings iden- tify TSP-1 mediated angiopoietin-2 induction as a crucial mechanism responsible for impaired preservation of the cardiac microvascular network in diabetes mellitus. Inhibition of the angiostatic actions of TSP-1 may have therapeutic potential in diabetic heart disease. Novelty and Significance Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on February 22, 2023