See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/336097431 Ef cient 3D Placement of UAVs with QoS Assurance in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks Conference Paper July 2019 DOI: 10.1109/ICCCN.2019.8846947 CITATIONS 16 READS 115 4 authors, including: Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Stochastic Geometry Modelling and Analysis of Wireless Edge Caching View project Control of robots with communication and destination objectives View project Bhanukiran Perabathini Alcatel Lucent 6 PUBLICATIONS 95 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Vineeth S Varma French National Centre for Scientific Research 92 PUBLICATIONS 517 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Vineeth S Varma on 01 April 2020. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. Ef cient 3D placement of UAVs with QoS assurance in ad hoc wireless networks Bhanukiran Perabathini , Kiranteja Tummuri , Achal Agrawal , Vineeth S Varma Mahindra cole Centrale, Hyderabad, India; CRAN, Universit de Lorraine, France {bhanukiran.perabathini, kiranteja160556, achal.agarwal}@mechyd.ac.in vineeth.satheeskumar-varma@univ-lorraine.fr Abstract In this work, we consider a wireless communication system consisting of multiple rotary-wing unmanned aerial vehi- cles (UAVs) used as areal base stations (ABSs) in order to provide downlink connectivity to the user terminals (UEs) on the ground. Towards investigating power ef cient deployment strategies for such a system, the contribution of this article is twofold: we formalize the relevant multi-objective optimization problem, and secondly develop Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) based techniques for optimization of the individual objectives, which are then exploited in an iterative manner. The relevant optimiza- tion objectives for reducing the total power consumed are the number of base stations (BSs) and their transmit powers. The optimization is performed while assuring minimum quality-of- service constraints (QoSs) such as per-user coverage probability and per-user rate. Through system level simulations, we show that the developed approach ensures great reductions for both the number of base stations as well as their individual transmit power, thus saving initial deployment cost as well as reducing operational costs induced due to energy consumption. Index Terms unmanned aerial vehicles, green communica- tions, 5G and beyond, energy aware network, ad hoc networks I. INTRODUCTION Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) (commonly known as drones) are becoming ubiquitous in various applications like safety surveillance, shipping and delivery applications, search and rescue operations, remote sensing and wireless commu- nications. In wireless communications, thanks to their small size, mobility, and exibility in positioning, they nd key applications such as providing connectivity in remote areas or disaster-affected areas, or enhancing an already existing terrestrial cellular network [1]. UAVs can be deployed as aerial base stations (ABSs) in areas where it is not feasible to build ground cellular infrastructure or where service is required only for a short period of time. A key advantage of UAVs lies in the establishment of a fast and reliable line-of-sight (LoS) connection with the ground users and/or terrestrial network of ABSs by changing their position in 3D space in any required direction. After the massive loss of infrastructure in Puerto Rico due to Hurricane Maria in the year 2017, AT&T used drones tted with LTE to provide cellular service to people on the island [2]. This further demonstrates the usefulness of UAVs in setting up ad hoc mobile connectivity. Despite the clear advantage they bring, there are many challenges involved in planning, designing and deploying them. Minimizing power consumption of the UAV based communication systems is a crucial research topic and attracted great attention recently [3][4][5][6]. The total cost of deployment of ABSs to provide downlink connectivity to the ground user terminals (UEs) has two cost components - 1) the xed cost : which depends on the number of ABSs that need to be deployed; 2) the operational cost : major component of which is the total power consumption of the whole network, where the total power consumption of the network is further divided between the power needed by the UAVs to hover, and the power consumed in signal transmissions. The two cost components are mutually coupled via the number of ABSs that are deployed. Thus, reducing the number of ABSs will help in reducing both the costs. However, in the long term, operational costs dwarf the xed upfront costs, and are thus a bigger priority. Reducing the operational cost essentially boils down to reducing the total power consumed by the network, especially given the rising energy prices. Thus, the relevant optimization problem is to minimize this total power consumption with respect to the 3D placement of the UAVs while taking into account the quality-of-service (QoS) constraints such as per-user coverage probability and per-user rate for a xed distribution of UEs on the ground. The total power consumption is directly proportional to the number of ABSs as well as the average individual transmit power required by these ABSs. However, the multiple ob- jectives of reducing both these quantities are complementary. Indeed, reducing the number of ABSs might lead to increased transmit power consumption, and conversely, reducing trans- mit power might lead to increase in required number of ABSs. In most of the existing works optimization of these two objectives is treated as two independent problems ( xing one while optimizing the other). For example in [7], the authors consider the problem of reducing the number of UAVs to be deployed while the transmit power of the ABSs is considered xed. In [8], the authors consider the problem of minimizing total transmit power, but only the case with no interference among the UAVs has been addressed, and the number of ABSs is considered xed. In this paper, we argue that taking both the components into account in order to reduce the the total power consumed leads to better results compared to reducing only one of them. Optimizing the two components jointly is dif cult due to the prohibitive complexity. Even optimizing a single component is non-trivial due to its non-convex nature. Therefore, we develop particle swarm optimization (PSO) based optimization algo- rithms for the individual objectives of minimizing the number of ABSs as well as their individual transmit powers. We then exploit these algorithms in an iterative manner to converge to locally optimal solutions. Through extensive simulations, we show the gain in performance achieved through the developed iterative process when compared to the cases when only one of the objectives was optimized. The algorithm therefore gives a cost ef cient and energy ef cient solution for 3D placement of ABSs in an ad hoc network without any need for cell planning. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section II we describe the system model and de ne various parameters that we examine. In Section III we formulate the main op- timization problem. In Section IV we present the algorithms and explain how the PSO technique is adopted. In Section V we explain the simulation setup. In Section VI we present conclusions and give indicate future directions. II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION Fig. 1. UAVs deployed as aerial base stations and UEs distributed arbitrarily on the ground. Consider a 2D plane in which nu UEs are distributed at arbitrary xed locations {(x1, y1), . . . , (xnu, ynu)}, on the ground. We begin by supposing that we need nb = [ nu k ] rotary-wing UAVs each carrying a ABS to provide downlink connectivity for the users. The value of the k needs to be xed based on factors such as the maximum traf c load a ABS can handle on an average. We de ne Ptot, the total power consumed by the nb UAVs as Ptot = nb(Phov + Pt) (1) where Phov is the power needed for a UAV to hover, and Pt is the individual transmitted power of all the ABSs. Our task now is to deploy these UAVs in 3D locations {(u1, v1, w1), . . . , (unb, vnb, wnb)} such that target QoS con- straints coverage probability and rate are assured to the users. A. Air-to-ground channel model For the jth ABS located at the coordinate (uj, vj, wj), let ij {0, 1} denote the event of LoS which takes the value 1 when there is LoS with the ith UE, and 0 otherwise. Then, the probability of LoS is given as [9] P( ij = 1) = 1 1 + a exp( b[ 180 c ij a]) (2) where, a and b are constants which depend on the environment (rural, urban, dense urban etc), c ij = sin 1( wj d(xi,yi)) is the elevation angle, dj(xi, yi) = p (uj xi)2 + (vj yi)2 is the distance on the ground. The path loss between the ABS and the UE in our model is given by Lj(xi, yi)[dB] = 20 log 4 fcd(xi, yi) c  + ij LoS + (1 ij) NLoS (3) where fc is the carrier frequency, LoS and NLoS are the average additional loss to the free space propagation for LoS and no-line-of-sight (NLoS) connections respectively. B. Connection policy The connection policy that we adopt is that each UE gets connected to the ABS that offers the strongest signal-to- interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR), provided that it is greater than the coding-modulation target , which is required for successful reception. The SINR received by the ith UE located at (xi, yi) from the jth ABS located at (uj, vj, wj) is given by SINRj(xi, yi) = Pt/Lj(xi, yi) N0 + Ij(xi, yi) (4) where Lj(xi, yi) is as de ned in Eq 3, N0 is the noise, and Ij(xi, yi) = Pnb j =1,j =j Pt/Lj (xi, yi) is the interference caused due to all the UAVs other than the jth one. We now de ne the connectivity matrix as cij 0 i<nu 0 j<nb = 1 if j = min 0 j <nb{j |SINRj (xi, yi) } 0 otherwise. (5) Following this de nition, the entry cij is equal to 1 if and only if the ith user is connected to the jth ABS. Further, each row of the connectivity matrix contains at most one non-zero element because a user can only connect to one ABS at any given instance. C. Qualities-of-service constraints (QoS) 1) Per-user coverage probability: The rst QoS factor that we consider is the per-user coverage probability ( Pcov) which is the average value of coverage probability of all the users. We guarantee it to be greater than a target as follows Constraint 1: Pcov (6) where, Pcov = 1 nu nu X i=1 P nb X j=1 cij = 1 , (7) and P[.] is the probability that the SINR received by the user at location (xi, yi) is greater than . 2) Per-user rate: The second QoS constraint that we con- sider is the per-user rate R, and we constrain it to be greater than a target . Constraint 2: R (8) where, R = 1 nu nu X i=1 WiE log 1 + nb X j=1 cijSINRj(xi, yi) (9) where, Wi = B Mj is the bandwidth allocated to the ith user for a xed total bandwidth B, and Mj = P i cij is the number of users that are connected to the jth ABS. Note that when a UE is not connected to any ABS, its received rate will be zero. III. PROBLEM FORMULATION As stated in Section I, we only consider minimizing the total power consumption (Eq 1) as it is the major component of the operational costs. Reduction of xed costs is a by-product of this optimization, due to reduced number of ABSs. We formulate the optimization problem of minimizing the total power consumption Ptot while constraints in Eq 6 and Eq 8 are satis ed: minimize uj,vj,wj Ptot = nb(Phov + Pt) ; where j {1, 2, .., nb} subject to Pcov and R . (10) Our goal is to nd the optimal 3D position coordinates (uj, vj, wj) which minimize the total power required to satisfy the QoS constraints. This problem is non-convex in nature and standard convex optimization techniques are not applicable here. As one can clearly see, the only controllable quantities in the objective function of Eq 10 are the number of base stations nb, and their individual transmit power is Pt. Minimizing these quantities are two contrasting tasks as reducing the number of base stations might lead to increased average power consumption. Therefore, the optimization problem Eq 10 is a multi-objective optimization problem with the following objectives: (objective-1) Minimization of transmit power - Considering nb to be xed, nd the UAV positions (uj, vj, wj) which minimize the transmit power P t . (objective-2) Minimization of no. of UAVs - Considering, instead, that Pt is xed, nd the UAV positions (uj, vj, wj) which minimize n b, the number of UAVs required. Ideally, one would like to jointly optimize the two objec- tives. However, the computational complexity of this joint optimization is prohibitive. We therefore propose instead to use ef cient PSO based algorithms for each objective and perform them in an iterative manner. A priori, it is not clear which of these objectives has a greater impact on the total power consumed Ptot. For example, if the power required for hovering was much higher than the individual transit power, Phov/Pt >> 1, then reducing the number of base stations would have a higher priority. Therefore, we perform both the optimizations in an iterative manner till we converge to minimal values for both nb and Pt, denoted henceforth as (nbPt) . Keeping this in view we will develop PSO based algorithms for these two approaches in Section IV. IV. ANALYSIS Solving the optimization problem in Eq 10 analytically is challenging due to the mutual dependence of (uj, vj, wj) and Mj, and due to the fact that uj, vj, wj are continuous variables that can take in nite possible values in 3D. Therefore, we solve the problem numerically using PSO based algorithms. Therein, a set of candidate solutions are iteratively improved upon with regards to a given cost function until a desired accuracy is reached. In our case, each candidate solution (a particle) represents the position coordinates of all UAVs in 3D space. In the analysis that follows, we describe the algorithms developed to numerically solve the optimization problem for both the individual objectives discussed in Section III. A. Minimization of transmit power We start with an initial population S(0) containing P randomly generated particles {W0(0), . . . WP (0)} each of dimension 3 nb. We then iteratively evolve each particle according to the equation Wp( + 1) = Wp( ) + Vp( + 1) (11) where, Vp( + 1) is the velocity term. This velocity term also changes every iteration based on: Wp( ), the previous position of the pth particle; Vp( ), its previous velocity; W local p , the positions associated with least cost for pth particle up to iteration ; and W global, the positions associated with the best particle up to iteration , in the following way: V (p)( + 1) = mV (p)( ) + c1r1(W local (p) W(p)( )) + c2r2(W global W(p)( )) (12) where, m is the inertial weight governing the speed of con- vergence of PSO, c1, c2 are the personal and global learning coef cients respectively, and r1, r2 are two positive numbers drawn randomly at every iteration. We de ne the cost function for Algorithm 1: U(W p) = min{Pt > 0| Pcov and R }. (13) to be the least possible transmit power that satis es the QoS constraints for a particle W p. We then use this and nd the optimal con guration of the UAVs for a given arbitrary distribution of the users. At the end of all the iterations, we record the best particle W global, which is the set of 3D positions of all the UAVs at which QoS requirements have been satis ed with least amount of transmit power P t . Algorithm 1 PSO for optimization of transmit power 1: function PSO 2: 0 3: Generate an initial population S(0) composed of P random particles {W1(0), W2(0), . . . WP (0)} each of di- mension 3 nb. 4: U local p Up(0), p [1, P] 5: U global min{U1(0), U2(0), . . . , UP (0)} 6: W local p Wp(0), p [1, P] 7: W global Wp(0) for p such that Up(0) = U global 8: 1 9: while < MaxIters do 10: Vp(1) 0, p [1, P] 11: for all p in {1,2,...,P} do 12: Compute Vp( ), Wp( ), Up( ) 13: if Up( ) < U local p then 14: W local p Wp( ), U local p Up( ) 15: if U local p < U global then 16: W global Wp( ), U global Up( ) 17: end if 18: end if 19: end for 20: + 1 21: end while 22: return (W global, U global) 23: end function B. Minimization of no. of UAVs To minimize the number of ABSs, we employ the mod- i ed version Algorithm IV-B to contain two cost functions corresponding to the two QoS constraints de ned in Eq 6 and Eq 8. We rst nd ABS positions that optimize the coverage probability, and then optimize the average rate while assuring that the coverage probability never falls below the target . Once, we have the positions for all the ABSs, which offer good coverage probability as well as average rate, we start reducing the number of ABSs. To this effect, starting with the optimal con guration, we eliminate the redundant ABSs by going through them iteratively, and removing the ones that do not affect the two constraints. This approach is similar to the ones used in [10],[7]. During this optimization, the value of Pt is considered to be xed. For Pt values that are too low, the algorithm may not show any improvement in terms nding the optimum con guration. V. SIMULATION RESULTS We analyze the performance of our iterative procedure through extensive simulations. To this end, we execute the algorithms described in Section IV with numerical values for parameters given in Table V (unless speci ed otherwise). We examine the scenario in which UEs are spread according to a 2D Gaussian distribution about the point (0, 0) with a standard deviation of 2 km. For the UAVs we initialize the position coordinates (u, v, w) drawn uniformly with u, v [ 5 km, 5 km], and w [100 m, 600 m]. Algorithm 2 PSO for minimization of no. of ABSs 1: function PSO 2: 0 3: Generate an initial population S(0) composed of P random particles {W1(0), W2(0), . . . WP (0)} each of di- mension 3 nb. 4: U Pcov 5: U local p Up(0), p [1, P] 6: U global max{U1(0), U2(0), . . . , UP (0)} 7: W local p Wp(0), p [1, P] 8: W global Wp(0) for p such that Up(0) = U global 9: 1 10: while True do 11: Vp(1) 0, p [1, P] 12: for all p in {1,2,...,P} do 13: Compute Vp( ), Wp( ), Up( ) 14: if Up( ) > U local p then 15: W local p Wp( ), U local p Up( ) 16: if U local p > U global then 17: W global Wp( ), U global Up( ) 18: end if 19: end if 20: end for 21: if U = Pcov and U then 22: U R 23: end if 24: if U = R and U then 25: return (W global, U global) 26: end if 27: + 1 28: end while 29: end function Environmental parameters (Eq 2) and (Eq 3) (urban) a = 9.61, b = 0.16 c = 3 108, LoS = 1, NLoS = 20 System parameters (Eq 4) N0 = 90dBm, = 7dB fc = 2 GHz, B = 20 MHz Simulation Parameters (Eq 10) and (Eq 12) = 0.95, = 1 Mbps c1 = 1.3962, c2 = 1.3962, m = 0.3298 In Fig. 4, we show the variation of per-user coverage prob- ability and per-user rate with respect to individual transmit power of the ABSs. Different curves correspond to different values of carrier frequency fc. We note that the constraints in Eq 10 for = 0.95 and = 1 106 Hz are simultaneously satis ed only when Pt is at least greater than 2.5 W. Hence in the simulations done for the calculations of total power consumed by the system (Fig. 6), we assume the Pt = 2.5W for the cases that do not minimize the transmit power Pt. The effectiveness of our iterative method of performing the multi-objective optimization can be seen in Fig. 2. We see that massive improvements can be made in terms of number of ABSs as well as their individual transmit power. Starting from (27.78, 51) (28.45, 41) (32.04, 38) (30.0, 39) (14.00, 29) (13.37, 28) (15.29, 24) (14.39, 25) 10 15 20 25 30 20 30 40 50 Individual transmit power of ABSs (Pt) [dBm] No. of ABSs (nb) Fig. 2. The shaded region in Pt and nb space is where both the QoS constraints are satis ed for random ABS locations (averaged over several UE distributions). To demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm, we pick up random points from this region as starting values and nd the optimal con gurations of ABSs where the constraints are satis es for lower nb and Pt values. Note that all these nal values converge to the bottom left quadrant. a point (Pt, nb) in the region where both the constraints are satis ed for many possible UE distributions, we can optimize considerably in both directions. This can be more clearly seen in Fig. 3, where we illustrate the initial and nal ABS positions for the two different optimizations, as well as the result when both are optimized iteratively. We can see that for 1000 UEs, by minimizing only Pt we achieve the QoS at total transmit power of 35 0.039 = 1.365 W, whereas minimizing only objective-2 this is only made possible for total transmit power of 27 2.5 = 67.5 W. By minimizing both objectives iteratively, we manage to reduce the total transmit power to 24 0.033 = 0.792 W. In Fig. 5, we compare the P t against the number of users per base station, k. We notice that P t increases with k as expected, and is higher for larger values of carrier frequency fc. The plot is obtained by averaging over several different initializations. Note, however, that the P t is much smaller than the Pt required to satisfy the two QoSs (as in Fig 4). A. Signi cance in reduction of total power expenditure Taking power required to hover Phov into account we can estimate the total power expenditure of the system. To this effect we consider the model Phov = p (2Mg)3/16 A as in [11], for M = md + mpl where md is mass of the drone and mpl is mass of the payload, g = 9.8m s 1 is acceleration due to gravity, = 1.2 Kgm 3 is density of air, A = 0.362m2 is the rotor area. Also, we assume a linear relation mpl 10 log(1000 Pt). Notably, typical mass of a base station emitting 2.5W would be around 1.2Kg [12], and a drone able to carry such a payload is Phantom [13] which is 1.5kg in weight (including batteries). In Fig. 6, we use these relations and nd the total power expenditure (a) random deployment of UAVs nbPt = 35 2.5 = 87.5W UEs UAVs (b) minimum Pt with xed nb nbP t = 35 0.039 = 1.365W (c) iterative minimization of Pt and nb (nbPt) = 24 0.033 = 0.792W (d) minimization of nb n bPt = 27 2.5 = 67.5W minimization of Pt minimization of nb Iterative minimization of Pt and nb Fig. 3. (a) Initial random deployment of UAVs. (b) and (c) The resulting system con gurations after individual aPSO optimizations. (d) System con- gurations after iterative application of the two algorithms. We can see that the iterative approach leads to a much better values for (nbPt) . 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 Pcov 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 9 105 1 106 1.1 106 R [bits/s/Hz] Pt [W] fc = 1G Hz fc = 2G Hz fc = 3G Hz fc = 4G Hz Fig. 4. Variation of per user coverage probability and per user rate with individual transmit power (1000 user terminals, 35 UAV base stations and averaged over several random con gurations). Target values for both the constraints are satis ed when Pt 2.5W. 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 10 15 20 25 fc = 4 GHz fc = 3 GHz fc = 2 GHz fc = 1 GHz No. of users per base station (BS) k = nu nb P t [dBm] Minimum required transmit power Fig. 5. Optimal transmit power of the UAVs for a range of values for k, for different carrier frequencies. 10 20 30 40 45 50 55 Total power consumed by the system Mass of the UAV md [Kg] Ptot = nb(Pfly + Pt)[dB] random deployment Optimizing Pt Optimizing nb Optimizing Pt and nb Fig. 6. Variation of total power consumed by the system with the mass of the drones. We see that for lighter drones (< 20Kg), the total power consumption of the system is signi cantly reduced by minimizing Pt, whereas when the drones are heavier we see that minimizing nb saves more energy. However in either case the iterative approach gives a relatively more ef cient solution. of the system, nb(Phov + Pt), before and after optimization for different masses of drones. For these typical values, the gains achieved by optimizing Pt is considerable, even when compared with optimizing nb. It should also be noted that higher UAV mass md is only needed when the base station emits at higher power, in which case, the bene ts of rst approach would be even more pronounced. VI. CONCLUSION In this work, we studied the power minimization problem in a wireless communication system where unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are used as aerial base stations (ABSs) providing downlink connectivity to the ground users. We de ne the problem of optimizing the total power consumed by the system while ensuring target values of per-user coverage probability and per-user rate with respect to the 3D locations of the ABSs. We note that the total power expenditure is dependent on the number of ABSs as well as their transmit power. We develop algorithms to minimize each of these and analyse the reduction in total power through simulations. We notice that an iterative approach where these algorithms are applied on to the system repeatedly leads to a much more energy ef cient solution to the optimization problem. In our future works, we plan to explore the theoretical aspects of this problem. Also, we would like to study optimal locations of charging points and optimization of trajectories of ABSs to and from these charging points. REFERENCES [1] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, Y. Nam, and M. Debbah, A tutorial on uavs for wireless networks: Applications, challenges, and open problems, CoRR, vol. abs/1803.00680, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.00680 [2] Flying Cow Connects Puerto Rico, https://about.att.com/inside_ connections_blog/ ying_cow_puertori, accessed: 2017-06-30. [3] L. Wang, B. Hu, and S. Chen, Energy ef cient placement of a drone base station for minimum required transmit power, IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, pp. 1 1, 2018. [4] E. T. Ceran, T. Erkilic, E. Uysal-Biyikoglu, T. Girici, and K. Leblebi- cioglu, Optimal energy allocation policies for a high altitude ying wireless access point, Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies, vol. 28, no. 4, 2017. [5] Y. Zeng and R. Zhang, Energy-ef cient uav communication with tra- jectory optimization, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3747 3760, June 2017. [6] A. M. Hayajneh, S. A. R. Zaidi, D. C. McLernon, M. D. Renzo, and M. Ghogho, Performance analysis of uav enabled disaster recovery networks: A stochastic geometric framework based on cluster processes, IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 26 215 26 230, 2018. [7] E. Kalantari, H. Yanikomeroglu, and A. Yongacoglu, On the number and 3d placement of drone base stations in wireless cellular networks, in 2016 IEEE 84th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Sept 2016, pp. 1 6. [8] M. Mozaffari, W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Debbah, Optimal transport theory for power-ef cient deployment of unmanned aerial vehicles, in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), May 2016, pp. 1 6. [9] A. Al-Hourani, S. Kandeepan, and S. Lardner, Optimal lap altitude for maximum coverage, IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 569 572, Dec 2014. [10] H. Ghazzai, E. Yaacoub, M. Alouini, Z. Dawy, and A. Abu-Dayya, Optimized lte cell planning with varying spatial and temporal user densities, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 1575 1589, March 2016. [11] R. Allain. (2013) Physics of the Amazon Octocopter drone. https://goo. gl/k7DpyF. [12] Flexi Zone Micro Bts Product Description, url = https://goo.gl/8HT18a, note = Accessed: 2013-12-30. [13] Dji phantom drones. [Online]. Available: https://www.dji.com/ phantom-4-pro View publication stats