See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/321327518 Soft Metaphor Detection Using Fuzzy c-Means Chapter December 2017 DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-71928-3_38 CITATIONS 5 READS 132 4 authors, including: Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Metaphor Processing View project PERSONALIZED E-LEARNING View project Sunny Rai University of Pennsylvania 21 PUBLICATIONS 80 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Devendra Kumar Tayal IGDTUW 57 PUBLICATIONS 567 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Sunny Rai on 12 December 2017. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. Soft Metaphor Detection using Fuzzy c-means Sunny Rai1, Shampa Chakraverty1, Devendra K Tayal2, and Yash Kukreti1 1 Division of Computer Engineering, NSIT, Delhi, India {post2srai, apmahs.nsit, yashkukreti8117}@gmail.com 2 Dept of Computer Science and Engineering, IGDTUW, Delhi, India dev tayal2001@yahoo.com Published in proceedings of MIKE-2017, Hyderabad, India. Final version is available at https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-71928-3_ 38. Cite as : Rai S., Chakraverty S., Tayal D.K., Kukreti Y. (2017) Soft Metaphor Detection Using Fuzzy c-Means. In: Ghosh A., Pal R., Prasath R. (eds) Mining Intelligence and Knowledge Exploration. MIKE 2017. Lecture Notes in Com- puter Science, vol 10682. Springer, Cham Abstract. Prior works in metaphor detection have largely focused on crisp binary classi cation of textual input into metaphorical or literal phrases. However, the journey of a metaphor from being novel when newly created to eventually being considered dead due to the acquired familiarity with the mapping over a time span, is a continuum. This observation guides us to the idea that a metaphorical text is indeed, partially literal and partially metaphorical. In this paper, we investigate the idea of soft metaphor detection by assigning membership values to fuzzy sets representing varying degrees of metaphoricity. We use a set of conceptual features and apply a simple unsupervised technique of Fuzzy c-means to illustrate fuzzy nature of metaphors. We report our experi- mental results on a dataset of nominal metaphors to illustrate the concept of soft metaphor detection and demonstrate their simultaneous member- ship in multiple classes by visualizing overlapping clusters, metaphor and literal. 1 Introduction A metaphor is a cognitive phenomenon which maps an abstract concept in a tar- get domain to a relatively concrete concept from a well-de ned source domain to ease the understandability in communication [7]. The underlying idea is to discover patterns in the learned source domain which somehow helps in illus- trating the abstract concept. The selected mapping i.e. metaphor also re ects the perception of a writer about the target concept. Let us consider a sentence: An atom is a solar system. (a) Here, the mapping is performed between the solar system(source domain) and atom(target domain). In this mapping, tiny particles such as protons revolving Sunny Rai, Shampa Chakraverty, Devendra K Tayal, and Yash Kukreti around the nucleus are analogous to planets and nucleus corresponds to sun. To comprehend the sentence (a), we import our existing knowledge about structure of the solar system such as planets revolve around the sun , a planet have an orbit to understand the model of an atom. In the late 1980s, Nunberg categorized metaphors into two categories namely dead metaphors and novel metaphors [12]. As the terminology implies, dead metaphors are overly exploited mappings in daily parlance and thus adopt the metaphorical meaning as an extended literal interpretation. One such example is the usage of the word gem in the phrase My husband is a gem. The word, gem1 initially meant a crystalline rock that can be cut and polished for jewelry or a precious or semiprecious stone incorporated into a piece of jewelry but at present, its meaning extends to a person who is as brilliant and precious as a piece of jewelry which is a metaphorical interpretation. Dead metaphors are considered equivalent to literal text as one does not need to perform any mental mapping to interpret it. In contrast, novel metaphors are newly generated mappings and require common-sensical knowledge of concepts involved in the mapping to extract contextually coherent metaphorical interpretation. Recent studies in metaphor detection have largely focused on crisp binary classi cation of textual input as metaphorical or literal [6,11,14,17]. However, a metaphor undergoes a process of gradual transition from being initially novel to eventually being considered dead. The transition begins from the state of highest metaphoricity when a metaphor is created and used for the rst time and gradually declines to the lowest metaphoricity when it is considered to be a dead metaphor due to its frequent usage in common parlance. Thus, we argue that a hard classi cation of a given phrase exclusively to the classes metaphor or literal is not a pragmatic approach. The extent of novelty or metaphoricity of a metaphor is determined by the uniqueness of the mapping between the source domain and the target domain concepts in a metaphorical expression. Working on the hypothesis that a novel metaphor is generated when an unseen or rare comparison is made between two unrelated concepts, we infer the extent of novelty of a metaphorical expression by examining the semantic relatedness between the mapped concepts. Semantic relatedness is a metric based on distributional hypothesis which states words which are similar in meaning occur in similar contexts [16]. A low co-occurrence frequency indicates a novel usage and thus, low relatedness between the mapped concepts. Other psychological features such as imageability [2,3], meaningfulness [14] and familiarity [18] indicate the propensity of a word being metaphorical. In this paper, we investigate the concept of metaphoricity for a given textual phrase through the notion of degree of membership in fuzzy clusters [1]. We contend that a soft metaphor detection approach based on metaphoricity would lead to a more informative metaphor processing system. We perform unsuper- vised soft metaphor detection which classi es sampled data into three classes namely, metaphor, literal and probably metaphor. The ternary classi cation cre- ates a subset of doubtful cases which requires further processing thus improving 1 WordNet search(gem): https://goo.gl/ej2PUY Soft Metaphor Detection using Fuzzy c-means the con dence of classi ed instances. We use the R package e1071 [9] to imple- ment FCM for our experiments and use a publicly available dataset of nominal metaphors provided in [13] to analyze the validity of the proposed soft metaphor detection approach. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief introduction to existing work in metaphor detection. In Sect. 3, we explain the application of FCM to determine metaphoricity for a textual input and report the results of a soft binary classi cation to identify metaphors in text. We conclude our work in Sect. 4. 2 Related Work In this section, we discuss the prior studies on detection of nominal metaphors. Krishnakumaran et al. in [6] utilize WordNet [21] to verify the absence of hy- ponymy relations in the mapped subject and object to identify metaphorical usages. This establishes the variation in semantic categories and thus a non- literal mapping. For example, consider the phrase My lawyer is a shark . In this phrase, the lawyer with semantic category PERSON is projected as a type of shark which is an ANIMAL . Therefore, this phrase is marked as a metaphorical phrase. However, the concept of hyponymy relation fails in case of polysemous words such as chicken which have multiple semantic categories i.e. ANIMAL and FOOD . In addition, a phrase with same semantic category for the subject and object is not necessarily a literal phrase [11]. One such example is My cat is a tiger. In [11], Neuman et al. resolved this problem by incorporating a disambiguation step which uses co-occurrence frequency to identify most likely usage. Su et al. combines the hyponymy relation from WordNet with cosine distance between the source and target domains using word2vec embeddings [17]. The utility of conceptual metaphors revolves around understanding of the abstract concept that is conveyed in the target domain by relating it with a relatively concrete concept in the source domain [7]. Employing this hypothesis, Turney et al. in [20] and Klebanov et al. in [5] use the notion of relative abstract- ness between a word and its context to detect metaphors. Other psychological features (also known as conceptual features) such as imageability [2,14,19] and familiarity [18] have been also shown to be helpful in identifying metaphors. Rai et al. use fuzzy psychological features and word2vec embeddings to iden- tify nominal metaphors [15]. They later approximate the crisp classes namely metaphorical and literal using a fuzzy rough set model to tackle imprecision and vagueness in psychological features [13]. The existing studies on metaphor detection emphasize on contrasting the source and target domain concepts, without taking into account the degree of novelty of the metaphorical expression. The existing work emphasizes on metaphor detection without analyzing the novelty of the metaphorical expres- sion. To the best of our knowledge, there is no computational approach for any type of metaphors which explores the concept of fuzzy nature of a metaphor. Sunny Rai, Shampa Chakraverty, Devendra K Tayal, and Yash Kukreti In this paper, we introduce the concept of metaphoricity to represent the con- tinuous spectrum of possibilities between the extremes, literal and metaphor. The approach closest to our work is that proposed in [4]. However, they adopt a probabilistic approach, quantifying the likelihood of a phrase being metaphori- cal. On the other hand, our approach assigns membership values that quantify the degree to which a phrase may belong to di erent, yet overlapping classes of metaphoricity. The fuzzy approach has greater expressive power as it represents the realistic part-metaphorical, part-literal phases of a metaphorical expression in transition from its initial novel state to eventual dead state. 3 Soft Metaphor Detection using Fuzzy c-Means In this section, we elaborate upon our proposed FCM driven approach to model the concept of metaphoricity and enable an unsupervised soft classi cation of a textual input into the fuzzy sets metaphor, literal and probably metaphor. 3.1 Problem Representation In this paper, we restrict the problem of soft metaphor detection to nominal metaphors. In nominal metaphorical expressions, an explicit mapping is per- formed between the subject in the target domain and an object in the source domain. We use a dependency parser to extract the subject and object for all input utterances. The extracted pairs of <subject,object> are used for feature extraction in the next phase. 3.2 Feature Extraction We extract a set of conceptual features namely concreteness, imageability, fa- miliarity and meaningfulness for the source and target domains using MRC Psycholinguistic Database [22]. These are augmented by a set of derived fea- tures comprising the relative di erence between the psychological features of the subject and the object to capture the extent of variation in the selected phrase. We compute the cosine similarity between pre-trained word2vec embeddings [10] of the source and target domains to quantify the semantic relatedness that conveys the novelty of a mapping. We use word embeddings since they e ectively capture context and analogical relations between the concepts. 3.3 Fuzzy c-Means Let X = {x1, x2, x3, . . . , xN} be a set of N sample points in an n-dimensional feature space Rn. Let xk i represent the kth feature of a sample point, xi. Given a set of clusters C = {C1, C2, C3, . . . , Cc}, the fuzzy c-partitions of X are such that each sample, xi X has a membership value, ij in cluster, cj C with conditions such that, Soft Metaphor Detection using Fuzzy c-means ij {0, 1}, where 1 i N, 1 j c ; Pc j=1 ij = 1, where 1 i N ; and 0 < PN i=1 ij < N, where 1 j c . The inclusion of xi X in a fuzzy partition, Cj is determined by minimizing the objective function de ned in (1). Jm(C, v) = N X i=1 c X j=1 ( ij)m|xi vj|2 . (1) where v = {v1, v2, . . . , vc} represents a vector for centre of clusters. m denotes weighting exponent to indicate the level of fuzziness, where 1 m < . On the basis of number of clusters to be formed, the algorithm calculate the center, vj of cluster, j, using (2). vj = PN i=1 m ijxi PN i=1 m ij . (2) Thereafter, randomly initialized membership, ij of every sample point, xi X in every cluster Cj C is updated using (3). The algorithm converges when the objective function, Jm(C, v) ceases to improve by a xed minimum threshold, 0 < < 1 or the speci ed number of iterations are over. ij = 1 Pc k=1( |xi vj| |xi vk|) 2 m 1 . (3) In our case, there are two classes namely metaphor and literal, thus c = 2. The overlap between the clusters is considered to be probably metaphor samples. 3.4 Experiments and Results We used the R package e1071 V1.6-8 [9] and cluster V2.0.6 [8] to implement FCM algorithm. We used a publicly available dataset of nominal metaphors provided in [13] for our experiments. In [13], the authors used the dataset to demonstrate a supervised metaphor detection model using fuzzy rough sets. Since, our approach is an unsupervised approach, we de ne a baseline to evaluate the e ectiveness of our approach. We show clusters formed using FCM clustering algorithm in Fig. 1. The cluster containing a majority of metaphorical samples is marked 1 whereas the cluster containing mostly literal samples is marked 2 . For every sample in the dataset2, we plotted their degree of membership in the created fuzzy clusters as shown in Fig. 2. The black line represents the membership value of instances for the cluster literal whereas the red line indicates the membership for the cluster metaphor. For the baseline, we perform crisp classi cation using FCM. We mark a sam- ple, i as metaphor if its membership values, Mi in the cluster metaphor is higher 2 Metaphoricity: https://goo.gl/wmgjor Sunny Rai, Shampa Chakraverty, Devendra K Tayal, and Yash Kukreti Fig. 1. Clustering using FCM (Clusters: 1 -Metaphor, 2 -Literal) 0.25 0.50 0.75 0 50 100 150 samples degree of membership colour Literal Metaphor Fig. 2. Membership graph for metaphorical and literal samples. The x-axis represents the samples and y-axis indicates the degree of membership. Soft Metaphor Detection using Fuzzy c-means than its membership , Li in the cluster literal. The results for soft metaphor detection are summarized in Table 1. We formed three classes namely metaphor, literal and probably metaphor. The class, metaphor consisted of samples having membership value, 0.52 in cluster, metaphor where as samples with member- ship value 0.48 were marked as literal samples. The class, probably metaphor comprised of samples whose membership values lie in the range of (0.48, 0.52). The range is decided experimentally after examining the samples. Table 1. Results Approach Ametaphor Aliteral Aaverage |probably metaphor| Baseline(crisp classi cation) 62.67 81.34 72 NA Soft Metaphor Detection 71.6 82.14 75.91 13 Legend: Ametaphor-Accuracy for class metaphor, Aliteral-Accuracy for class literal, Aaverage- Average accuracy for metaphor and literal class, |probably metaphor|-cardinality of set, probably metaphor In Table 1, the average accuracy for our proposed approach is 75.91% which is 3.91% more than the average accuracy of the baseline approach. We observe a signi cant improvement of 8.93% in the accuracy of class metaphor over the baseline. There is a minor increase of 0.8% in the accuracy of class literal. On closer analysis, we observe that metaphorical samples such as The good news was an earthquake (sample:48 in Fig. 2) and An atom is a solar sys- tem (sample:50 in Fig. 2) were incorrectly classi ed as literal. The degree of mem- bership for the sample 50 in cluster literal is 0.75 and thus 0.25 in metaphor. Despite the fact that it is a metaphorical sample, the frequent usage in daily parlance has nulli ed its novelty and thus its application as a metaphor. The sample 48 has membership value of 0.65 in the cluster literal . This can be attributed to the high relatedness between the domains news and earthquake . Also for a human, it is di cult to unambiguously categorize the sample 48 as metaphor or literal. Likewise, few literal samples such as Marriage is a legal contract. are pre- dicted as metaphor. Technically, marriage is a contract but it is seldom conveyed so. Low co-occurrence and thereby low relatedness between marriage and con- tract led to its false classi cation in the class metaphor. From the results, we observe that soft metaphor detection do facilitate clas- si cation with higher accuracy and provides the scope for further analytical processing of doubtful cases. The degree of membership in the fuzzy cluster 1 (metaphor) acts as the metaphoricity of a given metaphorical expression. In Table 2, we present the metaphoricity obtained for a subset of 6 samples from the dataset. The table includes two pairs of similar subject-object phrases, one embodying a much higher degree of metaphoricity than the other. These examples illustrate how an unfamiliarity in the mapping between source and target domain concepts bends Sunny Rai, Shampa Chakraverty, Devendra K Tayal, and Yash Kukreti a phrase towards metaphorical usage. The complete list is publicly available on the link2. Table 2. Metaphoricity (Membership in clusters-metaphor) No. (Fig. 2) Sample Metaphoricity 9 New moon is a banana. 0.784 109 New moon is a curve. 0.438 31 His marriage was a short leash. 0.689 94 His marriage was controlling. 0.29 47 Control is fertilizer. 0.622 96 Control is encouraging. 0.338 In Table 3, we show the centroids of clusters in terms of the feature-values. The labels conc, imag, mean and fam denote the features concreteness, image- ability, meaningfulness and familiarity respectively. The su x o indicates that the extracted feature is for target domain i.e. object in the case of nominal metaphors whereas the su x d indicates the di erence between the values for the source and target domains. Table 3. Feature-value for cluster-centroids in FCM Feature conc o imag o mean o fam o conc d imag d relatedness Metaphor 0.772 0.698 0.502 0.656 0.633 0.498 0.177 Literal 0.538 0.447 0.277 0.604 0.498 0.371 0.183 Analysis Analyzing the clusters shown in Fig. 1, we observe that there is a signi cant overlap between the metaphor and literal clusters. The membership graph shown in Fig. 2 also strengthens the idea that a metaphorical text is in- deed partially literal and a literal text is partially metaphorical. The highest membership degree in cluster metaphor is 0.869 for Path through forest is a narrow lane. followed by The nearest star is a ball. . The lowest membership is 0.219 for Some tears are intriguing. followed by Atom is a solar system. . Few examples of probably metaphor are given below. My rat s fur is silk. (b) Brain is a machine (c) The sentences (b) and (c) are marked metaphor in the dataset. However, the membership degrees for these two phrases in the class, metaphor are 0.482 and 0.495 respectively. This supports our hypothesis that a metaphor gradually loses 2 Metaphoricity: https://goo.gl/wmgjor Soft Metaphor Detection using Fuzzy c-means its novelty and thereby, its metaphoricity. The comparisons atom-solar system, fur-silk and brain-machine are quite common and so have low metaphoricity. On the other hand, we also observe that some literal samples such as My young cousin is thin. , My ex-husband is good. and Hostility is hidden. have higher membership in the metaphor class. This may be due to the assumption of rare co-occurrences as an indicator of novelty and thus a metaphorical text. As shown in Table 3, the psychological features such as concreteness, image- ability, familiarity, meaningfulness are relatively high for metaphorical class in concordance with the existing ndings. The semantic relatedness for metaphori- cal samples is relatively lower than literal samples, as postulated by the theory of contextual incongruity. The relative di erence between psychological features of source and target domains is also an important feature to determine metaphor- ical samples. 4 Conclusion In this paper, we brought forth the idea that the journey of a metaphor from be- ing novel to being considered dead is a continuum. We argued that soft metaphor classi cation, which entails assigning a degree of membership to various levels of metaphoricity is a more practical and informative approach towards metaphor processing than a crisp classi cation, due to the fuzzy nature of concepts in human language. Through an analysis of cluster formation, we veri ed the hy- pothesis that metaphors do involve an analogous comparison of concepts in a somewhat inscrutable domain with concepts in a relatively more concrete, im- ageable and meaningful domain. For our future work, we are focusing on treating the intermediate category of probably metaphor to further analytical methods to predict their utility as metaphorical usage. References 1. Bezdek James, C.: Pattern recognition with fuzzy function algorithms (1981) 2. Bracewell, D.B., Tomlinson, M.T., Mohler, M., Rink, B.: A tiered approach to the recognition of metaphor. In: CICLing (1). pp. 403 414 (2014) 3. Broadwell, G.A., Boz, U., Cases, I., Strzalkowski, T., Feldman, L., Taylor, S.M., Shaikh, S., Liu, T., Cho, K., Webb, N.: Using imageability and topic chaining to locate metaphors in linguistic corpora. In: SBP. pp. 102 110. Springer (2013) 4. Dunn, J.: Measuring metaphoricity. In: ACL (2). pp. 745 751 (2014) 5. Klebanov, B.B., Leong, C.W., Flor, M.: Supervised word-level metaphor detection: Experiments with concreteness and reweighting of examples. In: Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Metaphor in NLP. pp. 11 20 (2015) 6. Krishnakumaran, S., Zhu, X.: Hunting elusive metaphors using lexical resources. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational approaches to Figurative Lan- guage. pp. 13 20. Association for Computational Linguistics (2007) 7. Lako , G., Johnson, M.: Metaphors we live by. University of Chicago press (2008) 8. Maechler, M., Rousseeuw, P., Struyf, A., Hubert, M., Hornik, K.: cluster: Cluster analysis basics and extensions. r package version 2.0. 1. 2015 (2017) Sunny Rai, Shampa Chakraverty, Devendra K Tayal, and Yash Kukreti 9. Meyer, D., Dimitriadou, E., Hornik, K., Weingessel, A., Leisch, F., Chang, C.C., Lin, C.C., Meyer, M.D.: Package e1071 (2017) 10. Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S., Dean, J.: Distributed repre- sentations of words and phrases and their compositionality. In: Advances in neural information processing systems. pp. 3111 3119 (2013) 11. Neuman, Y., Assaf, D., Cohen, Y., Last, M., Argamon, S., Howard, N., Frieder, O.: Metaphor identi cation in large texts corpora. PloS one 8(4), e62343 (2013) 12. Nunberg, G.: Poetic and prosaic metaphors. In: Proceedings of the 1987 workshop on Theoretical issues in natural language processing. pp. 198 201. Association for Computational Linguistics (1987) 13. Rai, S., Chakraverty, S.: Metaphor detection using fuzzy rough sets. In: Interna- tional Joint Conference on Rough Sets. pp. 271 279. Springer (2017) 14. Rai, S., Chakraverty, S., Tayal, D.K.: Supervised metaphor detection using con- ditional random elds. In: Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Metaphor in NLP. pp. 18 27. Association of Computational Linguistics (2016) 15. Rai, S., Chakraverty, S., Tayal, D.K.: Identifying metaphors using fuzzy conceptual features. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Information, Commu- nication and Computing Technology. Springer (2017) 16. Rubenstein, H., Goodenough, J.B.: Contextual correlates of synonymy. Communi- cations of the ACM 8(10), 627 633 (1965) 17. Su, C., Huang, S., Chen, Y.: Automatic detection and interpretation of nominal metaphor based on the theory of meaning. Neurocomputing 219, 300 311 (2017) 18. Thibodeau, P.H., Durgin, F.H.: Metaphor aptness and conventionality: A process- ing uency account. Metaphor and Symbol 26(3), 206 226 (2011) 19. Tsvetkov, Y., Boytsov, L., Gershman, A., Nyberg, E., Dyer, C.: Metaphor detection with cross-lingual model transfer (2014) 20. Turney, P.D., Neuman, Y., Assaf, D., Cohen, Y.: Literal and metaphorical sense identi cation through concrete and abstract context. In: Proceedings of the Con- ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. pp. 680 690. As- sociation for Computational Linguistics (2011) 21. University, P.: About WordNet. (2010), http://wordnet.princeton.edu 22. Wilson, M.: MRC Psycholinguistic Database: Machine-usable dictionary, version 2.00. Behavior Research Methods 20(1), 6 10 (1988) View publication stats