See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334503675 Senti-NSetPSO: large-sized document-level sentiment analysis using Neutrosophic Set and particle swarm optimization Article in Soft Computing July 2019 DOI: 10.1007/s00500-019-04209-7 CITATIONS 0 READS 13 4 authors, including: Amita Jain Ambedkar Institute of Advanced Communication Technologies and Research 39 PUBLICATIONS 85 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Charu Gupta Bhagwan Parshuram Institute of Technology 15 PUBLICATIONS 39 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Charu Gupta on 21 July 2019. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. FOCUS Senti-NSetPSO: large-sized document-level sentiment analysis using Neutrosophic Set and particle swarm optimization Amita Jain1 Basanti Pal Nandi2 Charu Gupta3 Devendra Kumar Tayal4  Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2019 Abstract In the last decade, opinion mining has been explored by using various machine learning methods. In the literature, document-level sentiment analysis has been majorly dealt with short-sized text only. For large-sized text, document-level sentiment analysis has never been dealt. In this paper, a hybrid framework named as Senti-NSetPSO is proposed to analyse large-sized text. Senti-NSetPSO comprises of two classi ers: binary and ternary based on hybridization of particle swarm optimization (PSO) with Neutrosophic Set. This method is suitable to classify large-sized text having more than 25 kb of size. Swarm size generated from large text can give a suitable measurement for implementation of PSO convergence. The proposed approach is trained and tested for large-sized text collected from Blitzer, aclIMDb, Polarity and Subjective Dataset. The proposed method establishes a co-relation between sentiment analysis and Neutrosophic Set. On Blitzer, aclIMDb and Polarity dataset, the model acquires satisfactory accuracy by ternary classi er. The accuracy of ternary classi er of the proposed framework shows signi cant improvement than review paper classi er present in the literature. Keywords Evolutionary algorithm  Neutrosophic Set  Opinion mining  Particle swarm optimization  Sentiment analysis 1 Introduction The eld of opinion mining has grown and matured enough to understand the relationship between buyers and sellers (manufacturers) in e-commerce. It has been demonstrated that the online user reviews play a vital role in in uencing the buyers to buy a desired product. For this reason, the polarity detection has become an overly blooming eld of research. In this regard, researchers have applied different techniques for polarity detection (classi cation) of a given text. The techniques applied depend upon the text nature, which can be divided into two categories: Subjective text and Objective text. Subjective text displays emotion of the author, while objective text shares a fact. Personal views, feelings or opinion about some facts lead to a polarity of mind, may it be positive, negative or neutral or it can express emotions. Authors of previous research have cap- tured such classi cation and sentiment score with varied algorithm which includes uni-gram, bi-gram, support vec- tor machine, Naive Bayes, maximum entropy, neural net- work, vector kernel, etc. Apart from this classi cation of text, the underlying sentiment can be analysed from three basic levels Document-level, Sentence level and Aspect level (Agarwal et al. 2015; Anne et al. 2017; Joshi and Nigam 2011). The polarity of emotions can be determined on document-level or on sentence level as per the text present in whole document or in a single sentence. At aspect level, the text provides positive polarity for a de - nite aspect (feature) where as it provides negative polarity for other aspects. Each of the aspects of analysis or clas- si cation has its own direction for merits. Document-level analysis gives polarity of a document having positive or negative sentiment over a text consisting more than one sentence (Pu et al. 2019; Sharma et al. 2014; Yessenalina et al. 2010). Generally any opinion about products, movies Communicated by O. Castillo, D. K. Jana. & Amita Jain amita_jain_17@yahoo.com 1 Ambedkar Institute of Advanced Communication Technologies and Research, Delhi, India 2 Guru Tegh Bahadur Institute of Technology, Delhi, India 3 Bhagwan Parshuram Institute of Technology, Delhi, India 4 Indira Gandhi Delhi Technical University for Women, Delhi, India 123 Soft Computing https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-019-04209-7 (0123456789().,-volV)(0123456789(). ,- volV) or other facts mentioned by people contains a text with at least 2 3 sentences. For opinion mining, it is signi cant to generate a polarity detection system for such documents. In this paper, the proposed method focuses on large-sized document-level analysis. Recently, researchers have shown comparison of machine learning algorithms on single instance of a review to detect the opinion of the text (Tripathy et al. 2017). They have reached to greater than 90% accuracy on IMDb movie review dataset by applying SVM with ANN as binary classi er. This method outperformed with other methods applied earlier such as application of only SVM or Naive Bayes (Pang et al. 2002). It is observed that the methods in the literature work are on the approach of a single instance of review which is merely 2 3 lines of opinion. State-of- the-art method for short text has been dealt in the work of Bouazizi and Ohtsuki (2017) using a multiclass ternary classi er for analysing twitter dataset. This approach again suffers from the same limitation of being used only on very short text twitter comment as opposed to large-sized text which is dealt in Senti-NSetPSO. This gives a forceful motivation to work with machine learning algorithms which can work on large-sized text. The aim of the proposed work is twofolds: to understand the intricacies with large-sized text and to determine the polarity of the sentiment with high accuracy. The accuracy of the proposed approach is measured using standard methods like precision, recall and F-measure. It has been analysed that the use of soft-computing techniques is widely dealt in the literature primarily the fuzzy logic approach. It is seen that the component membership and non-membership are dependent. Sentiment analysis is among some of the problems where membership and non- membership are not dependent. Neutrosophic logic helps in providing the model for such kind of problems. Neutrosophic approach de nes a tuple with a three-valued logic namely Truth, Indetermi- nacy and Falsehood. It is worth understanding that these three measures are independent of each other unlike fuzzy logic in classi cation. Neutrosophic classi er has the power to capture the indeterminacy beyond the crisp set of truth or false. Neutrosophic Set for further development is used for neutral classes of the document. Most recent development shows that PSO hybridization with Neutro- sophic logic has been tried in two different cases: one, for CT image segmentation and two, for information theory measures for forest re (Anter and Hassenian 2018; Gafar et al. 2018). In this paper, the variation of this algorithm (PSO with Neutrosophic Set) is analysed for sentiment analysis. PSO as evolutionary algorithm is chosen (corre- lated with the literature: Sect. 2) as it is simpler in com- putation as well as ef cient in terms of time and accuracy than other evolutionary algorithms. Senti-NSetPSO is the rst approach to analyse large- sized text as no other work in available in the literature. In this paper, the objective is to get the overall polarity of a document with the application of PSO on Neutrosophic values of the words of the review texts. Application of nature-inspired algorithms in sentiment analysis is in their infancy still now, as well as fuzzy logic or the extension of fuzzy logic such as Neutrosophic logic, needs more expo- sure on this area. In this paper, Senti-NSetPSO uses Neutrosophic concept for values of seeded words to optimize through PSO to get an overall opinion. The polarity score of words from the text is generated using SentiWordNet. The three Neutro- sophic values (positive, negative and indeterminacy) for each meaningful word are then fed to the PSO optimizer. Finally, optimized values of the document are classi ed for polarity determination. In sentiment analysis, Neutrosophic concept has not been applied earlier. In this paper, PSO is applied directly on Neutrosophic values of the document, whereas in earlier approaches,PSOhasbeenusedforfeatureselection.Themain contribution of the proposed work is to classify large-sized document where feature selection is a cumbersome and time- consuming task. Here, Neutrosophic values give a direct approach to apply PSO to categorize the document easily. The approachtoclassifylarge-sized documents has beenmodelled in two parts: ternary classi er and binary classi er. With the proposed approach, the ternary classi er showed improved results than machine learning algorithms applied earlier in the literature for review sentiment classi er. The work is organized as follows: Sect. 2 gives moti- vation of the proposed work. Section 3 discusses the rela- ted work available in literature. Section 4 gives an insight to Neutrosophic approach. Section 5 focuses on the pro- posed methodology of Senti-NSetPSO. Section 6 analyses the experimental results. Conclusion and future work are presented in Sect. 7. 2 Motivation This section describes the motivation of the proposed approach and the importance of the Neutrosophic logic. This section gives a clear understanding of the concept of Neutrosophic logic in developing the proposed framework. In crisp logic, there are two extreme values as True and False where the data are assigned 0 or 1 as membership of a system. In real-world applications, the parameters de ning the domain may not be captured within these two values. The conditions like usually, few, likely, not likely, mostly, unlikely, probably, nearly cannot be completely understood by truth or falsehood. Fuzzy set proposed by Zadeh gives a natural implementation for such situation. A. Jain et al. 123 Fuzzy logic applied to a variable allowed values with a degree of membership (Cheung et al. 2005; Kia et al. 2009). The membership value is between 0.0 and 1.0 and any intermediate value of a variable x say 0.2 implies that x is true for 20% of the time. Neutrosophic logic (Smarandache 2016) is an extension of fuzzy logic which gives a value of indeterminacy besides truth and falsehood. Neutrosophic implies The knowledge of neutral thought (Ashbacher 2002). Neu- trosophic can be understood by considering some real- world examples like for games: win/loss/draw, for voting: pro/cont/blank, for numbers: positive/negative/zero, etc. The inherent neutral or indeterminate value due to system imbalance can be measured and decision needs to be taken by human expert or rule-based systems in such situation. In Neutrosophic logic, sum of the components need not nec- essarily to be 1 but any value between -0 to 3 ? . It can de ne paradoxes where variables can be truth or false at the same time which is not possible in classic fuzzy system. In this paper, large documents (more than 25 KB size) are selected for classi cation. On large-sized documents ternary classi ers has not been applied in the state-of-the-art. For the rst time, Neutrosophic values are used for sentiment anal- ysis as a ternary and binary classi er application. The inherent motivation is to work on large-sized doc- uments like news articles, reports of any investigation, review comments, etc., which have not been taken for classi cation purposes. As discussed in Sect. 1, for such large documents, feature selection is a time-consuming process. Moreover, it is applicable in cross-domain texts where only positive, negative or neutral values will be relevant. Cross-domain texts are still not used for sentiment analysis purpose. The proposed model can be used for classi cation purpose of cross-domain texts as well. 3 Related work Opinion mining to get the decision values for movie reviews, electronic product reviews, election opinion has become an integrated part of our life. Fuzzy logic has been applied to evaluate the review tendency towards a score which will give the mass opinion (Ali et al. 2017; Bing and Chan 2014; Dragoni et al. 2015). The fuzzy behaviour of objective sentences can be categorized in positive, negative and indeterminacy values. Li and Tsai (2013) used fuzzy conceptual model for text mining. They used formal con- cepts which are relevant to new document to determine the cohesion of the document to the speci ed classes. The research was conducted for single class problem. Fuzzy formal concept analysis construct lattice for the document and term features which are used for further determination of classes of the new document. Document-level sentiment classi cation has been explored using various machine learning algorithms. Tri- pathy et al. (2017) tested these models on IMDb and polarity dataset. SVM is used for selecting the best feature, and then these selected features are used as the input to ANN. ANN classi es the review as positive or negative. Many researchers have used hybridization of machine learning techniques such as Naive Bayes, decision tree, SVM with n-gram model and genetic algorithms for the same purpose. Feature selection based on metaheuristic algorithms has increased the accuracy for document classi cation. Swarm intelligent algorithms have been used to perform two basic tasks: rst, select prominent feature, second, to remove noisy and overlapping features. A survey on application of swarm intelligence algorithm for sentiment analysis has been done which explores the advantages of these algo- rithms for feature selection (Kumar et al. 2016). ABC with SVM, ABC with Naive Bayes, FURIA, RIDOR, Hybrid PSO, ACO with decision tree, PSO with SVM, PSO with CRF are various other feature optimization algorithms which show considerable amount of increase in accuracy for sentiment classi cation. PSO and ACO have the proven power to get state-of-the-art accuracy with about 36% less selected feature set. In this paper, the convergence modality of PSO on Neutrosophic score of document concepts is studied. Neutrosophic means the study of neutrality and it is in its very early stage of development where very few research articles have used it for real-time applications. Following this concept, Colhon et al. (2017) have given a neutral score of a word to determine how much neutral it is. A word has two possibilities of neutrality rst, its score of Truth and Falsehood is zero with Indeterminacy value as 1 and second, to have a balanced Truth and Falsehood score which leads to neutrality. In the literature, there are only few applications of Neutrosophic value. For instance, Ansari et al. (2013) applied this logic to classify Iris dataset based on some predetermined rules. Some multiclass classi ers have been developed. For example, Bouazizi and Ohtsuki (2017) gave a pattern-based multiclass classi er on Twitter dataset. Their ternary classi er gives 70.1% of accuracy, whereas multiclass classi er gives 60.2% result. Nagarajan and Gandhi (2019) have reached 90.4% accu- racy on ternary classi er over Twitter dataset. Their hybrid method PSO and Genetic Algorithm for feature selection and Decision Tree for classi cation have outperformed all earlier methods including machine learning and meta- heuristic. The usefulness of Neutrosophic concept on ternary classi er is studied in Jain et al. 2019. In earlier approaches, Valdez (2015) has de ned an optimization approach using PSO with Genetic Algorithms using fuzzy logic. Also in Valdez et al. (2017), a Senti-NSetPSO: large-sized document-level sentiment analysis using Neutrosophic Set and 123 comparative study of fuzzy logic with PSO has also been studied in great detail. The comparative study also pro- poses a fuzzy particle swarm optimization based on the results of inertia weight adaptation strategies. Bai et al. (2018) proposed a two-stage PSO-based algorithm for feature selection. In the rst stage, four l- ters Correlation, Information gain, Gain ratio and sym- metrical uncertainty are used for feature selection, PSO is then used for further reducing the size of selected feature subset for better performance. In the second stage Pbest, GBest model is used for next selection of feature subset. After the iteration goes on for selection of global particle, the gBest particle of swarm gives the nal selection of the features. Maiyar et al. (2018) have calculated a comparison of PSO and its variant self-learning PSO combined with Bayesian network structure learning K2 score maximizing model. They have tested their module on components of fashion blogs which in uences the customer and studies their underlying structure. The most recent development in sentiment analysis is the use of deep learning techniques (Samui et al. 2017). Hassan and Mahmood (2018) used a framework that comprises of deep learning network for feature map learned by a convolutional network. CNN gives high-level features which are invariant to local translation. This framework is used for sentence classi cation and gives high accuracy in two benchmark dataset. Lee et al. (2018) also used convolutional neural network for sentence clas- si cation of positive and negative sentences using a weakly supervised learning method. This model not only classi es sentences but also identi es high polarity words present in the text. In this paper, the proposed method emphasizes on ternary classi cation which classi es positive, negative and neutral document. The same concept is used for binary classi er and it shows higher accuracy percentage. The result for binary and ternary classi cations is discussed in the subsequent sections. 4 Developing insight into Neutrosophic Set and PSO In this section, an insight into Neutrosophic Set and PSO is explained. These approaches form the basic architecture of Senti-NSetPSO. Classical set gives a crisp value for an element either 0 or 1. In advancement to this, fuzzy set proposed by Zadeh (1965) considers that every element is mapped to area value between 0 and 1, which shows its belongingness to the set. Zadeh s classical fuzzy set assigns a membership value which is determined by some mem- bership function which can be triangular function, trape- zoidal function, etc. In contrast to classical fuzzy set, Smarandache (2014) introduces Neutrosophic Set for an element in the universe, where each element has a three-way decision values. With the degree of membership, it generates a degree of non- membership and a degree of indeterminacy. In Neutro- sophic Set, three standard and non-standard subsets T (Truth), I (Indeterminacy), F (False) are de ned for each element of the Universe. Each element of the set have ranges which lies in]-0,1?[. An element x in universe U within a set M has three components namely (t, i, f) which interprets as the belongingness of x in M rep- resents with t % truth, i % indeterminacy, and f % false- hood. The components vary from 0 to 1 and can even be less than 0 or greater than 1. The components are not necessarily a number but can be a subset of type discrete or continuous set. The other categories can be open, closed, half open, half closed sets and it can also be union or intersection of previous sets (Smarandache 2014). Neutrosophic fuzzy set again have some categorization like Interval Neutrosophic Set, Single valued Neutrosophic Set or Re ned Neutrosophic Set (Wang et al. 2005a, b; Deli et al. 2015). All such Neutrosophic variations are de ned over discrete or continuous space and also vary in terms of the range of the three components of the elements. The idea proposed by Smarandache has a great impact in representation of real-world problems. Neutrosophic fuzzy logic has already been applied in physics, robotics as well as in NLP to generate word s neutral value calculation (Zhang et al. 2010; Smarandache and Vla da reanu 2011; Colhon et al. 2017). In Neutrosophic logic, every logical variable x is a three-value tuple as given in Eq. 1. X ft; i; fg 1 where t = degree of truth, f = degree of false, i = level of indeterminacy The characteristics of Neutrosophic logic help in maintaining a powerful construct for the logic. These characteristics are as follows: In order maintain the compatibility with fuzzy logic, the values of Neutrosophic logic made a special construc- tion where t i f 1:0 To indicate incomplete information, the Neutrosophic value t i f \1:0 For contradictory information on a variable gives t i f [ 1:0 A Neutrosophic cube as shown in Fig. 1, introduced by Dezert (2002), is a useful tool to visualize the concept of Neutrosophic Set. It is drawn in the 3D Cartesian coordi- nate system where T is the truth axis value ranges from]-0 1?[, I is the indeterminacy axis value ranges from]-0 1?[ and F is the false axis value ranges from]-0 1?[.In this gure Neutrosophic cube is taken with ranges [0,1]. The A. Jain et al. 123 cube can be extended in the more positive and more neg- ative directions to get the range]-0 1?[. For document classi cation, Neutrosophic classi er is used to classify the document. In the proposed approach, before classi cation, PSO is used to get the document s optimized Neutrosophic value. PSO as evolutionary algorithm is chosen as it has two major advantages (as correlated from the literature). First, it is simpler in computation and second, ef cient in terms of time and accuracy than other evolutionary group mem- bers. In PSO, a swarm of bird decides the path to reach to a speci ed objective coordinating among them. It is a social meta-heuristic algorithm where each particle moves to its known local best and global best positions towards a solution in the search space. In this iterative method, after every iteration, an updated position leads to a global solution. The stopping criteria in the proposed algorithm follow two basic conditions: To reach error value less than a prede ned one, or To reach for a de ned number of iteration. PSO is very ef cient, easy to understand and develop but in certain cases it falls, for instance, in a very large space or on a complex multidimensional dataset, its con- vergence is slow. The state-of-the-art shows that this problem can be overcome by PSO variants. For multidi- mensional data, Cooperative multiple PSO or for large- scale data Co-operatively coevolving PSO are proposed in the literature (Chan et al. 2007; Yang et al. 2008, respec- tively). Parallel PSO (Fan and Chang 2009) is used for parallel processing on large data. To avoid premature convergence, Attractive Repulsive PSO (Vesterstroem et al. 2002) uses addition and subtraction operator in attractive and repulsive phase, respectively. Besides these few algorithms, a huge number of variants are available for different needs. In the sentiment analysis, PSO has been used on selection of optimized features (Ahmad et al. 2015; Liu et al. 2017; Nirmala Devi and Jayanthi 2016). For duel optimization, PSO is used (Basari et al. 2013) for better result of selection of features and SVM is used for classi cation. In this paper, simple PSO on Neutrosophic value of document texts for polarity detection is used. The concepts and underlying proposed framework is explained in subsequent sections. The proposed algorithm shows a signi cant improvement after using PSO rather than applying only SVM for positive or negative sentiment selection. Hybrid approaches like PSO with Genetic algorithm for opinion mining also shows increase in accuracy measures over simple PSO application. 5 Proposed framework In this section, the detailed framework of Senti-NSetPSO is presented. The approach is further explained using a con- cept diagram and complete owchart. This section also explains the sample calculation for binary and ternary classi er. Neutrosophic logic gives liberty to express a word beyond duel class, i.e. positive or negative. It enhances the freedom of polarity detection by adding a neutral value to it. In document sentiment classi cation, fuzzy polarity detection has been used and tested on sen- tence or document-level. The extension to the fuzzy qual- i er is Neutrosophic quali er. In the proposed approach, opinion mining algorithm presents a three-class and two-class problems for the document. In Senti-NSetPSO, purely positive, purely neg- ative and neutral document for ternary classi er and purely positive/negative for binary classi er are considered. The Neutrosophic values of document are used to create a histogram. The probability score of the histogram is then used for calculations of tness function as each Neutro- sophic value is now considered as birds in the swarm. The swarm of points will lead to a best tted point by using PSO. The value received after optimization is then tted to the rule-based Neutrosophic classi er to classify the doc- ument. SentiWordnet 3.0 is used for extracting the word s neutrosophic value, i.e. positive, negative and neutral. These three-dimensional values are then used for document classi cation. The positive, negative or neutral values extracted from SentiWordnet 3.0 for each word tokenized from the document has shown that the measure of neutral words are far more than the polarity de ned words. So while taking the weight of each component, neutral com- ponents are assigned less weight value. The tness function for PSO is based on probability distribution taking histogram generated for each F(1,1,1) C(0,1,0) B(1,1,0) A(1,0,0) H(0,0,1) G(0,1,1) E(1,0,1) T axis I axis F axis D(0,0,0) Fig. 1 Neutrosophic cube three-dimensional view Senti-NSetPSO: large-sized document-level sentiment analysis using Neutrosophic Set and 123 component, i.e. Truth, Indeterminacy and Falsehood. As for positive and negative document, the neutral words are much more in quantity and then the method suppresses the neutral word taking fraction of indeterminacy value. PSO is based on the behaviour of particles of swarm and their social interaction. The inspiration for PSO algorithm is based on search of food in a ock of bird. In the beginning, every particle of swarm has its own solution in the 3D space having its coordinate as Truth, Indeterminacy and falsehood. As the time goes, each particle updates its solution while changing its velocity. The velocity is changed towards the resultant of its own experience and the neighbour s experience (factor of velocity). If the ith par- ticle have its position as Xi (t) at the time instance t, velocity as Vi t and its best known position as pBesti t then the updation of velocity (please refer Fig. 2) at time t ? 1 is given from Eqs. 2 and 3: Vi t 1 k  Inertia  C1  R1  Vi t C2  R2  pBesti t  Xi t C3  R3  gBest t  Xi t 2 Xi t 1 Xi t Vi t 1 3 where gBest t is the best known solution that all the particle experienced up to the time t from the beginning, C1, C2, C3 are the correction factor that controls the con- tribution of local and global best position vector. C1 is the inertia and C2, C3 are referred as cognitive and social parameters, respectively. R1, R2, R3 are the random number between [0, 1], and k is the constriction fraction to control the swarm explosion effect given by Eq. 4. k 2k=j 2  u  u2  4u p jwhere u c2 c3 4 The tness function includes three components: tness of Truth, tness of Indeterminacy, and tness of Falsehood. The contribution of tness of Indeterminacy is sup- pressed intentionally as for any document whether it is positive or negative document, the neutral words appear hugely. The stop words have been removed from the document, and for classi cation, Part-Of-Speech as noun, adjective, verb and adverb have been extracted. The score of each derived word is taken from SentiWordNet 3.0 (Baccianella et al. 2010). SentiWordNet 3.0 is used which gives a score of a variable for Negative, Positive and Objective. Each of these three scores lie between [0,1], and sum of these three scores is 1.0. This is in analogous to Neutrosophic logic values. It is a publicly available lexical resource in which each WordNetsynsets is associated with three numerical score Obj(s), Pos(s) and Neg(s). There are two polarity variants which are captured from this resource rst, Positive Negative polarity, second, Sub- jective Objective polarity for multiclass classi cation. Figure 3 depicts the overall concept towards the Senti- NSetPSO approach to the sentiment analysis. The algorithm for ternary and binary classi cation is presented in Fig. 4 and 5. Diving into the details, positive, negative and neutral documents are parsed by Standford parser. The words are then sent to SentiWordNet to get positive and negative sentiment values. Indeterminacy value is calculated as 1-Positive Negative. The swarms are analysed as a set of Neutrosophic values of words, which is roughly more than 1000 for each document of 100 sen- tences. Histogram (hist function in MATLAB) is calculated as an interval of Lmax speci ed in the program: [n_countT,x_valueT] = hist(swarm(:,1,1),Lmax); [n_countI,x_valueI] = hist(swarm(:,1,2),Lmax); [n_countF,x_valueF] = hist(swarm(:,1,3),Lmax); In this case, obtained histogram intervals are as x_value and the count of number of swarms as n_count for all the three components Truth, Indeterminacy and False. Proba- bility is generated for Lmax number of divisions of Swarms for all the three cases. For each swarm, the velocity x , y and z components are taken as Truth, Indeterminacy and Falsehood Neutrosophic values. Fitness function for each component is calculated as probability distribution of the particular swarm with the Index value in the histogram processing. Fitness function for Ternary Classi er and for each swarm of Truth, Indeterminacy and Falsity value is calculated using Eqs. 5 and 6: Fitness Probability 1 : Index  xvalue 1 : Index Probability 1 : Lmax  xvalue 1 : Lmax 5 ResultantFitness W1  FitnessTruth W2  FitnessIndeterminancy W3  FitnessFalse 6 Vi(t+1) gBest pBest Vi(t) Fig. 2 Particle swarm optimization velocity updation with Local Best(pBest) and Global Best(gBest) A. Jain et al. 123 Total Fitness is taken as a percentage combination of Truth tness, Indeterminacy tness and False tness. For each swarm, the tness is calculated. The maximum tted swarm for the current iteration is taken as a local best. For all the iteration, the maximum tted swarm will be the Global best. For each iteration, the swarm velocity is updated in x, y and z direction as described in Eq. 2 and 3. For the better results, the parameters of Inertia, C1, C2 and C3 are varied. Results of Optimized value of Truth, Falsity determines the positive, negative and neutral inclination of the document. Fig. 3 Concept diagram (binary and ternary classi cations) for the proposed Senti-NSetPSO method 1. Input Positive, Negative and Neutral document having more than 100 sentences 2. Parsing and POS tagging 3. Noun, verb,adjective and adverb words are taken 4. Extraction of Neutrosophic Truth, Indeterminancy and Falsehood component as Positive, Neutral and Negative value from SentiWordnet 3.0 of each taken words. SentiWordnet 3.0 gives Positive and Negative value. Neutral value = 1-Positive-Negative. 5. Each Swarm position is now initialized by the Neutrosophic value of the word considered as 3D points. 6. Generating Histogram for each components: Positive, Neutral and Negative 7. Each swarm velocity is initialized by a small number 8. For a predefined number of iteration a. Evaluate Fitness for each particle b. If fitness is greater than local best i. Update Local Best ii. If fitness is greater than Global Best 1. Update Global Best c. Update particle velocity d. Update particle position e. If v< , a small value then exit loop 9. Optimized Positive, Neutral and Negative value of positions in 3D obtained 10. Get mean of Positive and Negative swarm values 11. If ((Positive>Negative)||(Mean Positive > Mean Negative)) and |Positive- Negative|>0.15 then the document sentiment is positive 12. Else If((Negative>Positive)||(Mean Negative > Mean Positive)) and |Positive- Negative|>0.15 then the document sentiment is negative 13. Else If |Positive- Negative|<0.15 then the document is neutral Fig. 4 Algorithm for ternary classi cation using histogram- based PSO and Neutrosophic Senti-NSetPSO: large-sized document-level sentiment analysis using Neutrosophic Set and 123 Figure 4 describes the proposed algorithm for ternary classi cation. The Fitness function for Binary Classi er based on Probability Density calculation. For each swarm, tness is calculated using Eqs. 7, 8 and 9. FitnessTruth ncountTruth Index IntegrationundertheHistogramforTruthComponent 7 FitnessIndeterminant ncountIndeterminant Index IntegratiomundertheHistogramforIndeterminantComponent 8 FitnessFalse ncountFalse Index IntegrationundertheHistogramforFalseComponent 9 Process for optimization of swarms is same as ternary classi er. For prede ned iteration, optimization is done as discussed above. Mean of Total Truth components of swarm points and Mean of False components of swarm points are calculated. Results of Mean_Truth and Mean_- False decide the positivity and negativity of the document. Figure 5 shows the algorithm behind the binary sentiment classi cation. In this model, stochastic optimization algorithm PSO is used (proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart 1995). The classic population model contains fully connected topology and ring topology. These are also GBest and LBest model where all particles participate to consider the global best. In the proposed approach, Global topology has been used where all particles are fully connected and every particle is considered to search whole swarm and nd the global best tness value. Inertia is taken as 200.0 and Correction factor 300.0. Constriction factor is calculated from Correction factor which is 0.0033. These parameters kept same for both the ternary and binary classi er. 6 Experimental analysis and results In this section, the detailed experimental analysis for bin- ary and ternary classi er is presented with the obtained precision and recall values. The proposed framework is analysed based on overall accuracy of their performance. All the earlier approaches in document classi cation are feature based. This is the rst approach where Neutro- sophic values (t, i, f) are used for classi cation purpose by metaheuristic approach. From earlier approaches, a com- parison of machine learning methods like SVM, Naive Bayes, Hybrid SVM and ANN can be seen. Previously, metaheuristic approaches applied on feature selection for categorization. By using PSO, the optimized Truth, Inde- terminacy and falsehood value are obtained which are then used on rule-based categorization of positive, negative or neutral document. Algorithm of PSO gives three optimized values of Neutrosophic Truth (NT), Neutrosophic Indeter- minacy (NI) and Neutrosophic False (NF). Rules applied 1. Input Positive, Negative and Neutral document having more than 100 sentences 2. Parsing and POS tagging 3. Noun, verb,adjective and adverb words are taken 4. Extraction of Neutrosophic Truth, Indeterminancy and Falsehood component as Positive, Neutral and Negative value from SentiWordnet 3.0 of each taken words. SentiWordnet 3.0 gives Positive and Negative value. Neutral value = 1-Positive-Negative. 5. Each Swarm position is now initialized by the Neutrosophic value of the word considered as 3D points. 6. Generating Histogram for each components: Positive, Neutral and Negative 7. Each swarm velocity is initialized by a small number 8. For a predefined number of iteration a. Evaluate Fitness for each particle separately for Positive, Neutral and Negative Using Probability Density Function b. For Positive, Neutral, Negative do separately i. If fitness is greater than local best ii. Update Local Best iii. If fitness is greater than Global Best Update Global Best iv. Update particle velocity v. Update particle position 9. Points of Positive, Neutral and Negative value of positions in 3D changed according Optimized values 10. Get mean of Positive and Negative swarm values 11. If (Mean Positive> Mean Negative) then the document sentiment is positive 12. If(Mean Negative>Mean Positive) then the document sentiment is negative Fig. 5 Algorithm for binary classi cation using histogram- based PSO and neutrosophic A. Jain et al. 123 on these values give the document sentiment for positive, negative or neutral. 6.1 Settings in training phase The algorithm is tested on 32-bit operating system with 3 GB RAM. Eclipse: Java programming is used for the POS and SentiWordNet value extraction (Poria et al. 2013). The resultant document is then fed to MATLAB program for classi cation and optimization. For effective testing of the proposed methodology, the system uses a multi-domain Blitzer dataset of products of Amazon which is divided in 25 distinct categories. Sub- jective dataset of movie reviews from Rotten Tomatoes (Ericson and Grodman 2013) is considered as neutral dataset. Blitzer dataset is used in many sentence-level classi ers using machine learning (Liu et al. 2018). Within the scope of the proposed methodology, for designing a document-level classi er, a new dataset is created having 100 sentences from title and review tags of different user review comments. Hundred and thirty such positive docu- ments and 106 such negative documents are created having 100 sentences for each document. Each such le is more than 25 KB size. The dataset has been used mostly for sentence-level classi cation for Positive Negative polarity. The movie snippet dataset consists of plots of movies which are summaries of movies from Internet movie database (Pang and Lee 2004). Plots can be considered as objective dataset or neutral dataset. The objective is to classify neutral classes along with positive negative data- set. Plot is the dataset considered as neutral sentiment. The rule base applied for ternary and binary classi cations is explained in this section. 6.1.1 Rule of thumb for ternary classification IF NT [ NForMeanNT [ MeanNF and absolute dif- ference NT  NF [ 0:15, then the document is clas- si ed as positive IF NT NForMeanNF h iMeanNT and absolute difference NT  NF [ 0:15 then the document is classi ed as negative Else the absolute difference is less than 0.15 absolutedifference NT  NF \ 0:15 , the docu- ment is classi ed as neutral. As a binary classi er to classify, only Positive Negative polarity gives better result in the generated Blitzer dataset where 100 sentences of title and review comments for each document are taken 6.1.2 Rule of thumb for binary classification IF Mean of Truth component of all swarm [ Mean of False component of all swarm, then the document is classi ed as positive IFMean of Truth component of all swarm \ Mean of False component of all swarm, then the document is classi ed as negative To measure the precision, recall and accuracy and F-Measure confusion matrix is created for both the classi er: 1. Positive Negative classi er or binary classi er 2. Positive negative neutral classi er or ternary classi er Measurement will be based on True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), False Positive (FP) and False Negative (FN). True Positive is the positive opinion and classi ed as positive. Conversely, False Negative is positive opinion but classi ed as negative. Similarly, True Negative is negative opinion which is correctly classi ed as negative. False Positive is negative opinion which is categorized wrongly as positive. Precision, recall, accuracy and F-Measure are the parameters which scale the classi er and their computation is given from Eqs. 10 12. Precision TP TP FP 10 Recall TP TP FN 11 Accuracy TP TN TP TN FP FN 12 FMeasure 2  Precision  Recall Precision Recall 13 In Binary classi cation, out of total 130 positive docu- ments, 130 has come out as positive and no misclassi ca- tion is observed, whereas 106 negative documents have classi ed as 95 negative and 11 positive (please refer Table 1). The values obtained for precision, recall and Table 1 Confusion matrix for positive and negative document in binary classi er Positive Negative Accuracy (%) Positive Document = 130 130 0 100 Negative Document = 106 11 95 89.6 Senti-NSetPSO: large-sized document-level sentiment analysis using Neutrosophic Set and 123 F-measure are 0.922, 1 and 0.959, respectively. The overall accuracy has come out to be 95.3%. For multiclass clas- si er, Eq. 14 and 15 are used to compute the precision and recall. Precisioni Mii P j Mji 14 Recalli Mii P j Mij 15 For ternary classi er, an overall accuracy of 81.99% is obtained. The same positive and negative documents are used in ternary classi er also. In addition to these, 25 neutral documents of movie plot are used in the system. Out of 130 positive documents, 103 positive documents are classi ed accurately and 27 documents are wrongly clas- si ed. Out of 106 negative documents, 96 classi ed cor- rectly and ten classi ed wrongly. For neutral documents, 15 are classi ed as neutral out of 25 documents. Table 2 shows precision, recall and F-Measure values for each case and overall accuracy gain is 81.99% for the algorithm used. For ternary classi er, most of the works have been done on Twitter dataset. Twitter comments are very short sentences. But, our work is for large-sized texts which are more than 25 kb size. There is no research work available in the literature for such large-sized text. The plot for positive, negative and neutral accuracy percentage against the iteration of the ternary classi er shows that it is leading to the convergence as the iteration goes up (please refer Fig. 6). It shows that the graphs for positive, negative and neutral are almost parallel to x axis and remains almost same. The proposed model is also used for sentiment analysis on large text (approx 25 KB) collected from aclIMDb and Polarity dataset. Ternary and binary classi er results are shown in Tables 3 and 4. As correlated from previous research works on ternary classi ers which are on short text such as Twitter text or paper review, the comparison of the results is presented in Table 3. Table 4 shows com- parison of scienti c paper review binary results for machine learning algorithm with binary classi er results for proposed model on large texts. Ternary or multiclass classi cation has been a chal- lenging research area in the recent years. A comparative analysis of the results obtained from Senti-NSetPSO with previous ternary classi ers is discussed in Table 3. As discussed in Sect. 1, earlier methods have been tested on short text or Twitter data. The signi cance of comparison is to focus on the measuring parameter to give a highlight of current trends of Ternary classi cation. Bouazizi and Ohtsuki (2017) developed a feature-based approach for binary, ternary and multiclass classi er on Twitter dataset. However, Table 3 shows the results of comparison for ternary classi cation. Bouazizi and Ohtsuki (2017) anal- ysed the neutral class on Twitter data of news or twits which have no emotional polarity. Keith et al. 2017 eval- uated scienti c reviews for Spanish papers by two algo- rithms namely, Score algorithm and HS-SVM algorithm. The obtained results were different for binary, ternary and ve-point multiclass classi cation according to the increasing complexity. Keith et al. (2017) have applied their method on review of Spanish papers. As stated earlier, in this paper, the results have been compared with the ternary classi cation results for both the algorithms. 7 Conclusion and future work In the present research work, a hybrid composition Senti- NSetPSO based on PSO and Neutrosophic Set is presented. The framework is designed to understand the sentiment analysis of large-sized text. The method is novel as it incorporates the advantages of Neutrosophic Set with swarm intelligence. The experimental results (as discussed Table 2 Confusion matrix for positive, negative and neutral document in ternary classi er Positive Negative Neutral Precision Recall F-Measure Positive Document = 130 103 5 22 0.936 0.792 0.858 Negative Document = 106 5 96 5 0.880 0.906 0.893 Neutral Document = 25 2 8 15 0.357 0.6 0.448 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Posive Negave Neutral Fig. 6 Ef ciency plot of positive, negative and neutral document classi cation against iteration of the algorithm for ternary classi er A. Jain et al. 123 in Sect. 5) reveal the consistency of the proposed method. One of the most prominent advantages of the proposed method is that it eliminates the overhead of pre-processing and feature extraction of the text which was a mandatory step in earlier approaches. Further, the para-consistent and incomplete information is ef ciently characterized by Neutrosophic Set. This is because there is a notion of absolute truth and relative truth. As there is no restriction on T, I and F (except they lie in the subset of]-0,1?[), the non-dualism of input is ef ciently handled by Neutrosophic Set. Moreover, T, I and F are included in the non-standard interval]-0,1?[.The powerful construct of Neutrosophic logic gains strength from its characteristics which are dis- cussed in detail in Sect. 2. This also helps in building the Neutrosophic topology which is further computed on uni- tary non-standard interval. Through Senti-NSetPSO, the effective nature of Neutrosophic Set on text is quite encouraging. The reason is that initially the characteriza- tion of Neutrosophic Set was con ned to mostly image processing which included image segmentation, de-noising and so on. The exibility of Neutrosophic Set to form independent sets for truth, falsity and indeterminacy gave researchers a potential motivation to use Neutrosophic Set on text as well. In this paper, Senti-NSetPSO has been tested on large documents having more than 25 kb of size. The proposed work reached 81.99% for ternary classi er and 95.3% for binary classi er on large text collected from Blitzer data- set. It also gives more than 60% accuracy on large text collected from aclIMDb and Polarity dataset for ternary classi er. Earlier, the techniques are applied on small-sized documents having less than 1 kb size. As for such docu- ments, swarm size is less than 100 which is not leading to Table 3 Comparison of proposed Senti-NSetPSO results versus previous ternary classi ers Author (s) Approach and Dataset Year Accuracy Precision Recall F- Measure Bouazizi and Ohtsuki Pattern-based approach on short Twitter dataset 2017 0.701 0.697 0.701 0.699 Keith et al. Score Algorithm on Scienti c reviews in Spanish Language 2017 0.51 0.58 0.51 0.52 Keith et al. HS-SVM on Scienti c reviews in Spanish 2017 0.56 0.54 0.56 0.54 Keith et al. NB on Scienti c reviews in Spanish 2017 0.46 0.42 0.46 0.41 Keith et al. SVM on Scienti c reviews in Spanish 2017 0.48 0.46 0.48 0.46 Proposed Model Proposed framework Neutrosophic with PSO Senti-NSetPSO on Large documents (25 KB size) generated from Blitzer dataset 2019 0.819 0.724 0.819 0.733 Proposed Model Senti-NSetPSO on Large documents (25 KB size) generated from aclIMDdb dataset 2019 0.61 0.73 0.61 0.67 Proposed Model Senti-NSetPSO on Large documents (25 KB size) generated from Polarity dataset 2019 0.62 0.76 0.62 0.68 Table 4 Comparison of proposed Senti-NSetPSO results for binary classi er vs. previous binary classi ers Author (s) Approach and Dataset Year Accuracy Precision Recall F- Measure Keith et al. Score Algorithm on Scienti c reviews in Spanish Language 2017 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.81 Keith et al. HS-SVM on Scienti c reviews in Spanish 2017 0.79 0.8 0.79 0.79 Keith et al. NB on Scienti c reviews in Spanish 2017 0.68 0.67 0.68 0.64 Keith et al. SVM on Scienti c reviews in Spanish 2017 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.69 Proposed Model Senti-NSetPSO on Large documents (25 KB size) generated from aclIMDb dataset 2019 0.77 0.96 0.56 0.71 Proposed Model Senti-NSetPSO on Large documents (25 KB size) generated from Polarity dataset 2019 0.76 0.74 0.81 0.77 Proposed Model Senti-NSetPSO on Large documents (25 KB size) generated from Blitzer dataset 2019 0.953 0.922 1 0.959 Senti-NSetPSO: large-sized document-level sentiment analysis using Neutrosophic Set and 123 good convergence value. For large-sized documents gen- erated from Blitzer review dataset, swarm size is greater than 1000 and has given effective results (please refer Table 3). It is analysed that as the document size increases, the proportion of number of documents decreases. So there is a need for good numbers of large-sized document. Future work comprises of the implementation of vari- ants of PSO such as self-learning PSO, TRIBES or SPSO 2011 which will overcome the limitation of local optima (Li and Yao 2012; Li et al. 2011; Mekni et al. 2010; Zambrano-Bigiarini et al. 2013). This will work better with small-sized text for ternary classi cation which has three- dimensional opinion structure. Moreover, Senti-NSetPSO is applicable in cross-domain contents of documents which do not need any feature selection. Senti-NSetPSO can be extended in this direction also. Recent development of deep learning has been used in solving image processing, speech processing and various parts of NLP problem solutions including sentiment analysis. Deep learning or machine learning algorithms have not been tested with Neutrosophic values till now. So this can be taken as an experimental parameter in our future scope. Further, future research can be applied using various metaheuristic algorithms besides PSO for comparison with the result. Moreover, opinion generation on other review comments such as research paper review can be explored. The working of the proposed framework can be investi- gated more deeply for classifying documents including review comments on research papers, political analysis on a subject, police veri cation about any person or happen- ing, news coverage of any event for sentiment polarity nding. Accuracy improvement and more opinion classes will be the other considerations. Further, the Neutrosophic para-consistent logic and its topology can be investigated more deeply on short- and large-sized text. Compliance with ethical standards Conflict of interest The authors of the paper declare that we have no conflict of interest. References Agarwal B, Poria S, Mittal N, Gelbukh A, Hussain A (2015) Concept- level sentiment analysis with dependency-based semantic pars- ing: a novel approach. Cogn Comput 7(4):487 499 Ahmad SR, Bakar AA, Yaakub MR (2015) Metaheuristic algorithms for feature selection in sentiment analysis. In: Science and information conference (SAI), 2015. IEEE, pp 222 226 Ali F, Kwak D, Khan P, Islam SR, Kim KH, Kwak KS (2017) Fuzzy ontology-based sentiment analysis of transportation and city feature reviews for safe traveling. Transpo Res Part C Emerg Technol 77:33 48 Anne C, Mishra A, Hoque MT, Tu S (2017) Multiclass patent document classi cation. Artif Intell Res 7(1):1 Ansari AQ, Biswas R, Aggarwal S (2013) Neutrosophic classi er: an extension of fuzzy classifer. Appl Soft Comput 13(1):563 573 Anter AM, Hassenian AE (2018) Computational intelligence opti- mization approach based on particle swarm optimizer and neutrosophic set for abdominal CT liver tumor segmentation. J Comput Sci 25:376 387 Ashbacher C (2002) Introduction to Neutrosophiclogic. In nite Study Baccianella S, Esuli A, Sebastiani F (2010) Sentiwordnet 3.0: an enhanced lexical resource for sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In: Lrec, vol 10, no. 2010, pp 2200 2204 Bai X, Gao X, Xue B (2018) Particle swarm optimization based two- stage feature selection in text mining. In: IEEE congress on evolutionary computation (CEC). IEEE, pp 1 8 Basari ASH, Hussin B, Ananta IGP, Zeniarja J (2013) Opinion mining of movie review using hybrid method of support vector machine and particle swarm optimization. Procedia Eng 53:453 462 Bing L, Chan KC (2014) A fuzzy logic approach for opinion mining on large scale twitter data. In: Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE/ ACM 7th international conference on utility and cloud comput- ing. IEEE Computer Society, pp 652 657 Bouazizi M, Ohtsuki T (2017) A pattern-based approach for multi- class sentiment analysis in twitter. IEEE Access 5:20617 20639 Chan FT, Kumar V, Mishra N (2007) A CMPSO algorithm based approach to solve the multi-plant supply chain problem. In: Swarm intelligence, focus on ant and particle swarm optimiza- tion. InTech Cheung WW, Pitcher TJ, Pauly D (2005) A fuzzy logic expert system to estimate intrinsic extinction vulnerabilities of marine shes to shing. Biol Cons 124(1):97 111 Colhon M, Vla dut escu S , Negrea X (2017) How objective a neutral word is? A neutrosophic approach for the objectivity degrees of neutral words. Symmetry 9(11):280 Deli I, Broumi S, Smarandache F (2015) On neutrosophic re ned sets and their applications in medical diagnosis. J New Theory 6:88 98 Dezert J (2002) Open questions in neutrosophic inferences. Multiple Valued Log Int J 8(3):439 472 Dragoni M, Tettamanzi AG, da Costa Pereira C (2015) Propagating and aggregating fuzzy polarities for concept-level sentiment analysis. Cogn Comput 7(2):186 197 Ericson J, Grodman J (2013) A predictor for movie success. CS229, Stanford University Fan SKS, Chang JM (2009) A parallel particle swarm optimization algorithm for multi-objective optimization problems. Eng Optim 41(7):673 697 Gafar MG, Elhoseny M, Gunasekaran M (2018) Modeling neutro- sophic variables based on particle swarm optimization and information theory measures for forest res. J Supercomput 1 18 Hassan A, Mahmood A (2018) Convolutional recurrent deep learning model for sentence classi cation. IEEE Access 6:13949 13957 Jain A, Nandi BP, Gupta C, Tayal DK (2019) A hybrid framework based on PSO and neutrosophic set for document level sentiment analysis. In: 2nd International conference on information technology and applied mathematics (ICITAM) Joshi S, Nigam B (2011) Categorizing the document using multi class classi cation in data mining. In: 2011 International Conference on Computational intelligence and communication networks (CICN). IEEE, pp 251 255 Keith B, Fuentes E, Meneses C (2017) A hybrid approach for sentiment analysis applied to paper. In: Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD conference, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, p 10 Kia PJ, Far AT, Omid M, Alimardani R, Naderloo L (2009) Intelligent control based fuzzy logic for automation of A. Jain et al. 123 greenhouse irrigation system and evaluation in relation to conventional systems. World Appl Sci J 6(1):16 23 Kumar A, Khorwal R, Chaudhary S (2016) A survey on sentiment analysis using swarm intelligence. Indian J Sci Technol 9(39):1 7 Lee G, Jeong J, Seo S, Kim C, Kang P (2018) Sentiment classi cation with word localization based on weakly supervised learning with a convolutional neural network. Knowl Based Syst 152:70 82 Li ST, Tsai FC (2013) A fuzzy conceptualization model for text mining with application in opinion polarity classi cation. Knowl Based Syst 39:23 33 Li X, Yao X (2012) Cooperatively coevolving particle swarms for large scale optimization. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 16(2):210 224 Li C, Yang S, Nguyen TT (2011) A self-learning particle swarm optimizer for global optimization problems. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern Part B (Cybernetics) 42(3):627 646 Liu Y, Bi JW, Fan ZP (2017) Multi-class sentiment classi cation: the experimental comparisons of feature selection and machine learning algorithms. Expert Syst Appl 80:323 339 Liu Q, Zhang Y, Liu J (2018) Learning domain representation for multi-domain sentiment classi cation. In: Proceedings of the 2018 conference of the North American Chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies (Long Papers), vol 1, pp 541 550 Maiyar LM, Cho S, Tiwari MK, Thoben KD, Kiritsis D (2018) Optimising online review inspired product attribute classi cation using the self-learning particle swarm-based Bayesian learning approach. Int J Prod Res 1 22 Mekni S, Cha ar BF, Ksouri M (2010) TRIBES optimization algorithm applied to the exible job shop scheduling problem. IFAC Proceedings Volumes 43(4):344 349 Nagarajan SM, Gandhi UD (2019) Classifying streaming of Twitter data based on sentiment analysis using hybridization. Neural Comput Appl 31(5):1425 1433 Nirmala Devi K, Jayanthi P (2016) Sentiment classi cation using SVM and PSO. Int J Adv Eng Tech 411:413 Pang B, Lee L (2004). A sentimental education: sentiment analysis using subjectivity summarization based on minimum cuts. In: Proceedings of the 42nd annual meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational Lin- guistics, p 271 Pang B, Lee L, Vaithyanathan S (2002) Thumbs up? Sentiment classi cation using machine learning techniques. In: Proceedings of the ACL-02 conference on Empirical methods in natural language processing, vol 10, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002, pp 79 86 Poria S, Gelbukh A, Hussain A, Howard N, Das D, Bandyopadhyay S (2013) Enhanced SenticNet with affective labels for concept- based opinion mining. IEEE Intell Syst 28(2):31 38 Pu X, Wu G, Yuan C (2019) Exploring overall opinions for document level sentiment classi cation with structural SVM. Multimed Syst 25(1):21 33 Samui S, Chakrabarti I, Ghosh SK (2017) Improving the performance of deep learning based speech enhancement system using fuzzy restricted Boltzmann machine. In: International conference on pattern recognition and machine intelligence. Springer, Cham, pp 534 542 Sharma R, Nigam S, Jain R (2014) Opinion mining of movie reviews at document level. arXiv preprint arXiv:1408.3829 Smarandache F (2014) Neutrosophic theory and its applications. Collected papers, I. Neutrosophic Theory and Its Applications, 10 Smarandache F (2016) Classical logic and neutrosophic logic. Answers to K. Georgiev. In nite Study Smarandache F, Vla da reanu L (2011) Applications of neutrosophic logic to robotics: an introduction. In: 2011 IEEE international conference on granular computing (GrC). IEEE, pp 607 612 Tripathy A, Anand A, Rath SK (2017) Document-level sentiment classi cation using hybrid machine learning approach. Knowl Inf Syst 53(3):805 831 Valdez F (2015) Optimization of modular network architectures with a new evolutionary method using a fuzzy combination of particle swarm optimization and genetic algorithms. In: Fuzzy logic augmentation of nature-inspired optimization metaheuristics. Springer, Cham, pp 179 195 Valdez F, Vazquez JC, Melin P, Castillo O (2017) Comparative study of the use of fuzzy logic in improving particle swarm optimiza- tion variants for mathematical functions using co-evolution. Appl Soft Comput 52:1070 1083 Vesterstroem J, Riget J, Krink T (2002) Division of labor in particle swarm optimization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE congress on evolutionary computation, pp 1 6 Wang H, Smarandache F, Sunderraman R, Zhang YQ (2005a) Interval neutrosophic sets and logic: theory and applications in computing: theory and applications in computing, vol 5. In nite Study Wang H, Smarandache F, Zhang Y, Sunderraman R (2005b) Single valued neutrosophic sets. In: Proceedings of the 10th 476 international conference on fuzzy theory and technology Yang Z, Tang K, Yao X (2008) Large scale evolutionary optimization using cooperative coevolution. Inf Sci 178(15):2985 2999 Yessenalina A, Yue Y, Cardie C (2010) Multi-level structured models for document-level sentiment classi cation. In: Proceedings of the 2010 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 1046 1056 Zadeh LA (1965) Fuzzy sets. Inf Control 8:3 Zambrano-Bigiarini M, Clerc M, Rojas R (2013) Standard particle swarm optimisation 2011 at cec-2013: a baseline for future PSO improvements. In: 2013 IEEE congress on evolutionary compu- tation. IEEE, pp 2337 2344 Zhang M, Zhang L, Cheng HD (2010) A neutrosophic approach to image segmentation based on watershed method. Signal Process. 90(5):1510 1517 Publisher s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af liations. Senti-NSetPSO: large-sized document-level sentiment analysis using Neutrosophic Set and 123 View publication stats View publication stats