GA with k-Medoid Approach for Optimal Seed Selection to Maximize Social In uence Sakshi Agarwal and Shikha Mehta Abstract In this rapidly rising eld of Web, volume of online social networks has increased exponentially. This inspires the researchers to work in the area of infor- mation diffusion, i.e., spread of information through word of mouth effect. Infor- mation maximization is an important research problem of information diffusion, i.e., selection of k most in uential nodes in the network such that they can maxi- mize the information spread. In this paper, we proposed an in uence maximization model that identi es optimal seeds to maximize the in uence spread in the network. Our proposed algorithm is a hybrid approach, i.e., GA with k-medoid approach using dynamic edge strength. To analyze the ef ciency of the proposed algorithm, experiments are performed on two large-scale datasets using tness score measure. Experimental outcome illustrated 8 16% increment in in uence propagation by pro- posed algorithm as compared to existing seed selection methods, i.e., general greedy, random, discounted degree, and high degree. Keywords k-Medoid Genetic algorithm Social in uence Seed selection Topical af nity propagation 1 Introduction Web market share of online social networks is increasing exponentially. Social net- work is becoming tremendously substantial for various applications, i.e., educational, matrimony Web sites, government division, job search portals, recommendation sys- tem [1], health care, viral marketing [2], and numerous other businesses. In all these applications, Social network is commonly considered as a platform for information propagation in network, i.e., social in uence. In online social networks, activities of S. Agarwal (B) S. Mehta Computer Science & Information Technology, Jaypee Institute of Information Technogy, Noida, India e-mail: sakshi.of cialid@gmail.com S. Mehta e-mail: mehtshikha@gmail.com Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2020 A. Khanna et al. (eds.), International Conference on Innovative Computing and Communications, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 1087, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-1286-5_9 97 98 S. Agarwal and S. Mehta a person can lead to change in another person s behavior, i.e., social in uence. This change in user s behavior depends on the other user s in uence strength and infor- mation spreads from one user to another user. Spread of information depends on the user s position in the network. Selection of appropriate nodes becomes a challenge in order to gain maximum in uence spread in the system, i.e., in uence maximization. In uence maximization problem was proved to be NP-hard for numerous propa- gation models [3]. Therefore, this paper targets to maximize in uence extent by determining k optimal nodes in the system using dynamic edge strength. Therefore, information propagation through these nodes will maximize the effect of in uence in the network. In the past studies, various models and algorithms have been introduced with respect to social in uence [4]. Aslay et al. [5] presented the current state of the art of the in uence maximization (IM) in the eld of social network analysis (SNA), i.e., existing algorithms and theoretical developments in the eld of IM. Anagnostopou- los et al. [6] described social in uence identi cation problem methodically. They explained various social correlation models and proposed two methods that can identify in uence in network using time-dependent user action information. Chen et al. [7] extended discounted degree approach to improve in uence propagation in the system. Mittal et al. [8] identi ed that the centralities are the major elements to discover the important authors in collaboration networks. Chen et al. [9] proposed an algorithm which is scalable with respect to size of networks, i.e., social networks. In their algorithm, they used one tunable parameter which provides balance between the running time and in uence spread in the network. Similarly, Khomami et al. [10] proposed learning automaton-based solution to identify minimum positive in uence dominating set (MPIDS) to maximize in uence propagation. Goyal et al. [11] solved in uence maximization problem by their proposed model, i.e., credit distribution. Credit distribution method uses the propagation traces of each action in the time interval t and estimates the expected in uence ow in the network. Chen et al. [12] introduced a directed acyclic graph-based scalable in uence maximization approach that is modi ed with respect to linear threshold model. So, in uence maximization is a rising eld for which various theories and models have been introduced in the recent past years. Therefore, to optimize scope of in uence in the network, we have pre- sented a hybrid approach by selecting optimal seeds from the network. Kumar et al. [13] applied the concept of in uence propagation to detect the rumor on social media. The remaining part of this paper is arranged as follows: In Sect. 1, we explained the importance of in uence in social network. We have also described the role of good seeds in information propagation, and the related work has been done in this eld. In Sect. 2, we explain the proposed algorithm, i.e., GA with k-medoid approach for optimal seed selection to maximize social in uence. After this, in Sect. 3, we illus- trate performance analysis of proposed methodology with respect to other methods on two datasets. Lastly, we enclose conclusion and future work. GA with k-Medoid Approach 99 2 Proposed Methodology In this paper, we propose an in uence maximization technique by discovering appro- priate set of seeds that maximize the in uence spread in the network. Our proposed algorithm is a hybrid approach and divided into three steps as shown in Fig. 1. In the rst step, edge strength score is updated by topical af nity propagation (TAP) technique. In the second step, initial population set is generated using k-medoid algo- rithm. This initial population is given as an input to genetic algorithm (GA) to trace the optimal set of seeds that can increase the impact of in uence up to maximize extent. Given a directed network G = (E; V; S, k), where E denotes the set of links/edges (u, v), i.e., u, v mG, set of nodes is symbolized by V, and k is a variable that denotes the number of seeds. S is the set of edge strength score w.r.t edge set E, where edge strength score suv of an edge (u, v) is suv = 1 out_degree(u) Objective of our algorithm is to nd k optimal nodes as seed set V 1, where V 1 V and in uence spread is maximized in network G through set V 1. 2.1 Dynamic Edge Strength Score For a given network G(V, E, S), dynamic strength score of every edge Sd is calculated using topical af nity propagation algorithm. TAP is an algorithm which computes the topic-wise in uence likelihood of each node with respect to different node attributes as de ned in algorithm 1. In this paper, we considered one topic per node. Therefore, no node attribute required to input in TAP. Table 1 de nes the variables involved in the estimation of dynamic in uence likelihood. Node_score function is the base component of the TAP algorithm as de ned by Eq. 1. node(vi,ri) = siri  j N(i)(si j+s ji) ri = i  j N(i)(s ji)  j N(i)(si j+s ji) ri = i (1) Fig. 1 Flowchart of the proposed algorithm 100 S. Agarwal and S. Mehta Table 1 List of symbols vi A speci c node in G ri Representative node of node vi with highest edge_sum for node set {N(vi) vi} eij A link between nodes vi and vj sij Strength score of an edge eij Iij In uence score of node vi on node vj Tij In uence likelihood assumed by node vj to node vi, initial value = 0 Aij In uence likelihood node vj approves to take on self from node vi N(i) Set of all nodes having incoming edge from node vi Lnij Logarithm of the edge_score of edge (i, j) where ri is the node with highest edge_sum value in the set {N(i) i} for node i identi ed using Eq. 2. Edge_sum(vi) =  k N(i) sik (2) Similarly, logarithm of normalized edge_score Lni for node i, Aij, T jj, T ij and Iij calculated using Eqs. 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, respectively. Lni j = log node(vi,ri)|r i = j  k N(i) {i} node(vi,ri) |r i = k (3) Ai j = Lni j maxk N( j){Lnik + Tik} (4) Tj j = maxk N( j)min  Akj, 0  (5) Ti j = min max  A j j, 0  min  A j j, 0  maxk N( j)\{i}min  Akj, 0  , i N( j) (6) Ii j = 1 1 + e (A ji+Tji) (7) GA with k-Medoid Approach 101 Algorithm 1 Dynamic likelihood computation G(E, V, S) 1. Compute the influence value of each node vi using eq. 1 2. Compute Lnij for each edge e(i,j) using eq. 3 3. For each eij, initialize Tij = zero 4. Repeat till convergence 5. For all eij G 6.Compute Aij using eq. 4 7. For all vj G 8.Compute Tjj using eq. 5 9. For all eij G 10. Compute Tij using eq. 6 11. For all vi G 12. For every node 13. Compute Iki using eq. 7 14. Create G 1 (E, V, Sd), where Sd= I i.e. set of influence score of each edge. Therefore, in the initial phase of our proposed algorithm, we updated the edge strength score from S to dynamic edge strength score Sd. 2.2 Generate Initial Population Using k-Medoid Algorithm In this step, population set P of k nodes is generated such that this population easily converges in optimal time and generates optimal seeds to maximize in uence prop- agation in the network. In the past studies, various selection approaches have been introduced such as graph-based heuristics and mathematical models with respect to various domain, i.e., shortest path optimization [14] or in uence maximization [15]. In random model, selection of k nodes is arbitrary and does not depend on any of the property of node or edge attribute. It selects the k nodes in O(1) time. In general greedy model, choices made on the best are at moment basis such that the objective function is optimized. Therefore, it chooses best solution at every step. Node with largest neighborhood is the strongest node of the network is the hypothesis of the next method, i.e., high degree. Therefore, this method uses the out-degree for the directed graphs and degree for the undirected graphs. Extension of high degree is known as discounted degree or single discount heuristic. This heuristic believes that neighborhood of neighboring nodes is not mutually exclusive [16]. In this paper, we applied clustering algorithm, i.e., k-medoid algorithm to generate k cluster centers as population set P as described in algorithm 2. 102 S. Agarwal and S. Mehta Algorithm 2 k-medoid G(V, E, k) medoid set P = ({}1, {}2, , {}k-1,{}k): k node sets 1. Randomly select k nodes as medoids from V and assign them to P such as one me- doid per node set i.e. ({N}1, {N2}, , {Nk-1},{Nk}): 2. Calculate shortest distance of each non medoid node i w.r.t. each medoid Ni and al- locate a to closest medoid set. 3. For all medoid{}i: 4. For all non medoid point b: 5. Update medoid Ni with non medoid node b 6. Compute total distance Cli,vi.e. shortest distance from b to all nodes of G. 7. Select the Medoid set Ni with lowest cost 8. Repeat steps 2 to 7 till no change in medoid set P 2.3 Optimal Seed Selection Using Genetic Algorithm Genetic algorithm is a well-known and widely accepted optimization technique. In the literature, various studies and researchers addressed and proposed solution for various optimization problems using genetic algorithm [16]. In this paper, we used genetic algorithm to solve in uence maximization problem. For a given network G(E, Sd, V, P), genetic algorithm starts searching for k optimal nodes which can improve the in uence spread up to maximum extent using initial population set P, i.e., k nodes selected using k-medoid clustering algorithm. In this step, after each iteration we modi ed its population set P by replacing the least ef cient candidate node i with lowest tness score (i) with node j, i.e., generated using one random mutation and 1-point crossover with same probability one [16]. Therefore, objective of genetic algorithm over dynamic edge score Sd and initial population set P is maximizing spread of in uence by generating nal population space Pd as set of k optimal seeds of the network. 3 Experiments and Results We have performed detailed experiments on two datasets [17], i.e., Amazon co- purchasing network and wiki vote network. Details of these dataset are given in Table 2. We analyzed the performance of proposed approach with GA, i.e., embedded with various other seed selection methods, i.e., general greedy, random, discounted degree, and high degree. GA with k-Medoid Approach 103 Table 2 Datasets Dataset Details of dataset Network de nition Node count Edges count Degree statistics Wiki vote network If person i voted for person j, an edge i j created 7115 103,689 Lowest 0, highest 893 Amazon product co-purchased If an item i purchased along with item j, an edge i j created 5122 11,321 Lowest 0, highest 5 3.1 Evaluation Parameter In this paper, we have applied tness score, i.e., (Pd) as the performance parameter to compare the effectiveness of our proposed algorithm with other existing algo- rithms. The total number of non-in uenced nodes converted from non-in uenced to in uenced state by node set Pd is known as tness score of node set Pd, i.e., (Pd). Detailed description of cascade model to compute the tness score is given in our previous work [15]. 3.2 Analysis of Results In this paper, we analyzed ef cacy of the proposed approach with various existing seed selection methods, i.e., general greedy, random, discounted degree, and high degree methods embedded with GA using dynamic probabilities (GADP). We per- formed experiments on two datasets, i.e., Amazon product co-purchased dataset and wiki vote. In our experiments, we used different seed values raging from 10 to 50. Figure 2a and b shows the experimental results for Amazon product co-purchased and wiki Fig. 2 Statistical results: a wiki vote, b Amazon product co-purchased 104 S. Agarwal and S. Mehta vote, respectively. It is noticed from Fig. 2a that the proposed algorithm, i.e., k- medoid along with GADP which is indicated by sky blue line shows the better results as compared to all other algorithms used in this paper. For wiki vote dataset, discounted degree shows the second best results because of high out-degree ratio. It is clear through the outcomes of the experiments that the proposed algorithm increased in uence propagation by converting more number of nodes into in uenced state from non-in uenced state, i.e., up to 11%. Similar results have been observed from the Amazon product co-purchased dataset as shown in Fig. 2b. The proposed approach improved the in uence propagation up to 16% for Amazon product co-purchased dataset with respect to other approaches. For this dataset, greedy approach shows the second highest tness score because of low maximum out-degree ratio. Overall, from the results, it can be depicted that high degree and discounted degree show the good results for the datasets of small out-degree ratio and greedy approach shows the good results for the datasets of high out-degree ratio, whereas the proposed approach presented the improved results for both types of degree ratio, i.e., low and high. We have also performed the comparative analysis with respect to propagation value as well, i.e., tness score of the results generated by different approaches as shown in Fig. 3. It can be easily depicted from the Fig. 3 that our proposed algorithm shows the signi cant improvement in tness score as well with respect to all other approaches. Our proposed algorithm showed this improvement with respect to tness score for both the datasets. Overall, from experimental results we also observed an interesting behavior of our proposed algorithm w.r.t. other methods, i.e., consistency. Our proposed algo- rithm showed the improved results for different out-degree ratios, i.e., low and high both, whereas random, discounted degree, and high degree result are out-degree ratio dependent. Therefore, our proposed algorithm shows the improved in uence propagation by 8 16% with respect to other approaches. Fig. 3 Comparision of tness score: a wiki vote, b Amazon product co-purchased GA with k-Medoid Approach 105 4 Conclusion and Future Work In this paper, we proposed an in uence maximization model that identi es opti- mal seeds that maximize the in uence spread in the network. Our proposed algo- rithm is a hybrid approach, i.e., GA with k-medoid approach using dynamic edge strength. Through experiments, we analyzed ef cacy of proposed approach with var- ious existing selection methods, i.e., general greedy, random, discounted degree, and high degree methods embedded with GA and dynamic probabilities (GADP). In our experiments, we have used two types of datasets, i.e., wiki vote and Amazon product co-purchasing network with high and low out-degree ratio, respectively. Experimen- tal results demonstrate that the proposed approach is able to achieve up to 16% improvement in in uence spread with respect to other approaches. Through results, we also observed that performance of proposed algorithm is consistent, i.e., does not depend on the out-degree ratio. Therefore, our proposed algorithm maximized the in uence spread by nding optimal seeds as compared to other approaches. References 1. X. Song, Y. Chi, K. Hino, B.L. Tseng, Information ow modeling based on diffusion rate for prediction and ranking, in WWW (2007), pp. 191 200 2. P.Domingos,M.Richardson,Miningthenetworkvalueofcustomers,inKDD(2001),pp.57 66 3. D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, . Tardos, Maximizing the spread of in uence through a social net- work, in Proceedings of the Ninth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM (2003) 4. Y. Li, et al., In uence maximization on social graphs: a survey. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. (2018) 5. C. Aslay et al., In uence maximization in online social networks, in Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. ACM (2018) 6. A. Anagnostopoulos, R. Kumar, M. Mahdian, In uence and correlation in social networks, in Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM (2008) 7. W. Chen, Y. Wang, S. Yang, Ef cient in uence maximization in social networks, in Proceedings of the 15thACMSIGKDDInternational Conference onKnowledge Discovery andDataMining. ACM (2009) 8. R. Mittal, M.P.S. Bhatia, Identifying prominent authors from scienti c collaboration multiplex social networks, in International Conference on Innovative Computing and Communications (Springer, Singapore, 2019), pp. 289 296 9. W. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Wang, Scalable in uence maximization for prevalent viral marketing in large-scale social networks, in Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. ACM (2010) 10. M.M.D. Khomami et al., Minimum positive in uence dominating set and its application in in uence maximization: a learning automata approach. Appl. Intell. 48(3), 570 593 (2018) 11. A. Goyal, F. Bonchi, L.V.S. Lakshmanan, A data-based approach to social in uence maximization. Proc. VLDB Endowment 5(1), 73 84 (2011) 12. W. Chen, Y. Yuan, L. Zhang, Scalable in uence maximization in social networks under the linear threshold model, in Data Mining (ICDM), 2010 IEEE 10th International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 88 97 (2010) 106 S. Agarwal and S. Mehta 13. A. Kumar, S.R. Sangwan, Rumor detection using machine learning techniques on social media, in International Conference on Innovative Computing and Communications (Springer, Singapore, 2019), pp. 213 221 14. S. Agarwal, S. Mehta, Approximate shortest distance computing using k-medoids clustering. Ann Data Sci 4(4), 547 564 (2017) 15. S. Agarwal and S. Mehta, Social in uence maximization using genetic algorithm with dynamic probabilities, in 2018 Eleventh International Conference on Contemporary Computing (IC3) (Noida, India, 2018), pp. 1 6 16. D. Bucur, G. Iacca, In uence maximization in social networks with genetic algorithms, in European Conference on the Applications of Evolutionary Computation (Springer, Cham, 2016) 17. J. Leskovec, A. Krevl, Large Network Dataset Collection (2015)