ScienceDirect Available online at www.sciencedirect.com Procedia Computer Science 125 (2018) 609 616 1877-0509 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Peer-review under responsibility of the scientific committee of the 6th International Conference on Smart Computing and Communications 10.1016/j.procs.2017.12.078 6 Abstr Detec and s recent Multip relatio outlie may f study, in the propo 201 Peer-r Comm Keywo * Corre Email: 6th Internati ract cting anomalies o on. There are tly, the area of m plex network is onship among n ers means nodes, found into many , we propose a n e multiplex netw osed metric with 18 The Authors. review under res munications. ords:Multiplex Ne esponding Author : ruchi.mittal138@ ional Confer Anoma aResearch bProfes in social is a vi e multiple of te multiplex netwo a network, whi nodes. In this p which behave a y layers of the m new metric called work. For experim other similar me Published by El sponsibility of th twork; Anomaly D r. @gmail.com rence on Sma Decembe aly Detec Ruchi M scholor, Netaji Su ssor, Netaji Subha ital task, with nu chniques have b orks has extende ch contains mul paper, we discov abnormal or susp multiplex networ d cross-layer ano ments, we make ethods, and we g lsevier B.V. he scientific com Detection; multiple art Computin er 2017, Kur ction in M Mittal*a, M. ubhas Istitute of Te as Istitute of Techn umerous high im been developed ed a considerabl ltiple systems of ver the anomali picious in the sy rk and find anom omaly detection e use of two rea get encouraging mmittee of the 6th e Layers; Edges; N ng and Com rukshetra, Ind Multiplex .P. S Bhatia echnology, New D nology, New Delhi mpacted social n d for detecting o le attention amo f the same set of ies across nume stem. Compared malies in the mu (CAD). The CA al-world multiple and similar resu h International C Nodes; mmunications dia x Networ ab Delhi-110075, India -110075, India networks such a outliers and ano ong researchers f nodes and ther erous multiplex d to single layer ultiplex network AD is a measure, ex networks. W ults. Conference on Sm s, ICSCC 20 rks a as WWW, Faceb omalies in graph for more concre re exists various networks. By a networks, the ou is still untouche , which detects th We compare the r mart Computing 017, 7-8 book, Twitter h data. More ete results. A s types of the anomalies or utliers nodes ed. From this he anomalies results of our g and 610 Ruchi Mittal et al. / Procedia Computer Science 125 (2018) 609 616 1. Introduction It is interesting to find out the nodes, which shows the least appearance in a given network. A network is nothing but a collection of nodes joined together by edges [1]. Many real-life applications consist of network type structure where individuals act as nodes and relationship among them serves as edges. Finding individuals, which holds suspicious behavior or have the least appearance of the network is an exciting task and called as anomaly detection. For example, detecting networks intrusion or network failure [2], credit card fraud [3], telecommunications fraud [4] and so on. To all networks, there is an assumption that only one type of interaction exists between any two nodes. Sometimes this assumption may ignore the multiple interactions or relationship among entities of the network, which doesn t lead to refined results. A system formed by various interactions among entities is called a multiplex network [5, 6]. A multiplex network contains multiple layers; in which each segment represents one type of communication among entities. For example: in social networks, similar entities interact with others via Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn and so on. Existing graph theory concepts cannot be directly applied to such networks, as there exist cross-layer interaction between entities. In Fig. 1, we show a sample multiplex network with two layers, where two type of communication between nodes exist. Fig. 1. A Sample multiplex network with two-layerarchitecture. The combined concepts of data mining and graph theory are widely used to study the various features of the network. For example, using anomaly detection methods, one can find the suspicious nodes in the network. Anomaly detection is a branch of data mining, which is concerned with discovering rare occurrences in datasets [7]. In general, data objects are inter-related, and one can easily map this into graphs or networks. The multiple paths lying among two data object may efficiently capture the long-range relationship and helps to spot the suspicious object in the network. There are various methods defined for anomaly detection in networks such as distance-based anomaly detection [8], density based anomaly detection [9], distribution-based anomaly detection [10], clustering-based anomaly detection [11] and so on. Depending on the application, one can apply the anomaly detection method to find out the outlier nodes. For example, Clustering based method first find out the cluster in the network and then find out the nodes, which have least interaction. In this paper, we propose a methodology for anomaly detection in the multiplex network. Here, we used the famous Gaussian model [12] along with other defined features of a multiplex network to detect anomalous nodes in the network. The formulation for Gaussian model for the simple network is as follow: 1 (1) Here, is the training set, is the mean and is the variance. In figure 2, we present a sample network, in which nodes inside the red circle are the anomalous nodes of the network. Ruchi Mittal et al. / Procedia Computer Science 125 (2018) 609 616 611 find o the m a met furthe netwo comp Paper in Se sectio discu 2. Re B to the These C of the netwo propo betwe S propo netwo to fin netwo Whic 3. An There spotti centr centr each proba of ou 3.1. F a) L In this pap out the eigenve muxViz tool [13 thodology for er in detail in ork and Floren parably limited r Outline: we p ection II. We d on IV, we pres uss our findings elated Work Boccaletti et al e design and ty e structural pro Centrality is a e prominent ar ork to multiple ose a new algo eenness centra Sun et al. [20] osed an anoma ork. Li et al. [2 nd out the out ork. This softw ch are used for nomaly Detect e are numerou ing anomalou ality, page-ran alities present centrality mea ability. These l ur proposed app Find Probabili Let s assume a per, we propos ector centrality 3]. Next, we cr anomaly detec section III. W ntine families n d computationa present related discuss our prop sent essential c s. l.[16] discuss t ype of the netw operties include measure to fin reas of researc ex networks. S orithm for findi ality algorithm proposed a gr aly detection a 22] suggested t tliers in the sy ware has an int analysis of the tion in Multip us of algorithm s nodes in th nk centrality a the importance asures. To this t low probability proach. We des ty Set in Multip a graph G = (V Fig. 2. Example se an algorithm y, page rank ce reate a training ction. Here is a We validated o network [14, 15 al overhead. work in the ar posed approac haracteristics o the various cha work. Battiston e clustering co nd out the impo ch in the multi Sola et al. [18 ing the shortes for multiplex n raph-centric, i.e algorithm for the algorithm f ystem. De Dom eractive GUI, e multiplex net lex Networks ms exist for det he multiplex n and degree ce e of a node in training set, we y values nodes scribe our prop plex Network Vm, Em, Lm), wh e of anomaly detec m for detection entrality and th g set using the o a fundamental our proposed a 5]. To these dat rea of multiplex ch for detecting of datasets, wh aracteristics of n et al. [5] anal oefficient, verte ortance of a no iplex network. ] propose a ne st path in the m network compa e., community- web network. for the financia mnico et al. [ and numerous twork. ecting anomal network. Our entrality define the given netw e fit a Gaussian are considered posed method i here Vmdenotes ction in simple net n anomalous n he degree centra output of all th outlook of ou algorithm on tw tasets, our algo x networks, cen g anomalies in hich we use to f the multiplex lyze the structu ex degree and s ode in a given . Many researc ew formulation multiplex netwo are to Sola betw -based anomal It finds out t al trading netw 13] create soft of algorithms ies in simple n proposed algo ed for the mu work. Next, we n distribution a d as anomalou in following ste s the set of ver twork nodes in multip ality of a given he centrality me ur proposed app wo multiplexe orithm detects ntrality measur the multiplex validate our al x networks. Th ural properties so on of the net network. Cent chers redefine n for betweenn ork. Tanmoy e weenness centr ly detection me the spam and work. They use ftware called M of multiplex a networks. Here orithm starts w ultiplex netwo e create a traini and then find th us nodes. Here eps. rtices, Emdenot plexed network n multiplex net easures. Next, proach, which ed networks: D the anomalous res and anoma network in se lgorithm. In se hese characteris of the multiple tworks. trality measure centralities of ness centrality et al.[19] propo rality. ethod. Gyongy malware in a graph-based su MuxViz for th are well implem e, our work is with finding E rk for each n ing set using th he value that h is an informal tes the set of ed ks. We first twork using we propose h we discuss Danio Rerio s nodes with aly detection ction III. In ction V, we stics belong ex network. ement is one f the simple y. They also ose a fastest yi et al. [21] given web ub-structure he multiplex mented in it. directed on Eigenvector node. These he output of has very low description dges and Lm 612 Ruchi Mittal et al. / Procedia Computer Science 125 (2018) 609 616 is the set of layers. A node in set Vm is represented as Vi here Vi Vm and Lm. b) Also, assume each layer includes all nodes belongs to Vm such that | | . c) Compute eigenvector centrality, page rank centrality and degree centrality defied for multiplex network for each node. d) Next, create a training set for each using centrality measures values. e) Compute probability for each node using training set and Gaussain model as follow: 1 Here, is the mean and is the variance. f) Create a probability set , which contains probability of a node in each layer. g) Next, we pick the highest probability form the probability set such as h) Create a probability set for each node as follow  . 3.2. Compute Cross-layer Anomaly The cross layer anomaly detection (CAD) for multiplex network is given as Here, is the probability of a node in multiplex network and is the threshold. If the probability value is less then the given threshold then the node is anomalous in the network. We check the same for multiple values of threshold. We validate our approach on two dataset, which we discussed in later sections. . 4. Dataset Description 4.1. Danio-Rerio Dataset The Danio Rerio network dataset is a genetic and protein multiplex network of compiled by C. Stark et al. [14]. This dataset consists of five layers; in which each segment represents the system of five components of genetic relations for organisms. Here, each organism act as the node of the network; genetic interaction between any two- organism acts as an edge of the network and different type of communication or association between organisms corresponds to each layer of the network. The basic statistics of each layer of the dataset is in table 1. Table 1. Parameters of Danio-Rerio dataset Layers # nodes #edges #Density #Mean Path Length Association 4 2 0.5 1 Suppressive genetic interaction 33 25 0.8 1.4 Direct interaction 32 36 1.1 1.5 Additive genetic interaction 42 44 1.0 2.2 Physical association 69 81 1.2 2.6 4.2. Florentine Marriage Dataset Padgett [7] compiled the Florentine Families dataset. This dataset represents the marriage ties or business ties among Florentine families. This dataset consists of two layers, one layer serves the marriage alliance, and one Ruchi Mittal et al. / Procedia Computer Science 125 (2018) 609 616 613 layer represents the business alliance. In this dataset, each family member represents a node and relationship between two is represented by edges. The primary characteristic of the dataset is in table 2. Table 2. Parameters of Florentine Marriage dataset Layers # nodes # edges #Density #Mean Path Length Marriage 15 20 1.3 2.5 Business 10 15 1.4 2.4 In this multiplex network, high number of node overlapping exists, which increase the computation overhead but helps us to find out comparable results of closeness centrality. 5. Results In this section, we discuss our findings on anomaly detection in multiplex networks. We run our algorithm to two datasets, which we discussed in earlier section. 5.1. Danio-Rerio Dataset Results In this dataset, there is least overlapping of nodes exist between two consecutive layers of the network but there is high connectivity within the layer. This results to get less anomalous nodes in the system. The results obtained from Danio Rerio network shows that there are 4% of the nodes are irregular nodes. In figure 5, figure 6 and figure 7 we have demonstrated the outcomes of our algorithm. In figure 3, we visualize the dataset and show the placement of nodes concerning latency and throughput. Fig. 3. Visualization of danio rerio dataset In figure 4, we have shown the Gaussian distribution contours of the distribution fit to the dataset. The nodes fit inside the range of green line have the least possibility of being an anomalous node. In figure 5, nodes, which are irregular in the network, are encircled with red triangle. Fig. 4. gaussian distribution contours of the distribution fit to the dataset 614 Ruchi Mittal et al. / Procedia Computer Science 125 (2018) 609 616 Fig. 5. Nodes highled with red traingle are anomolous nodes 5.2. Florentine Marriage Dataset Results In this dataset, there is considerable overlapping of nodes exist between two consecutive layers of the network.The results obtained from Florentine families network shows that due to great marriage alliance and business alliance exist between individuals the percentage of anomalous nodes is very less. As the total number of nodes in the network is 15; there exist only two irregular nodes in the network. In figure 6, figure 7 and figure 8 we have shown the outcomes of our algorithm. Figure 8 shows the placement of nodes concerning latency and throughput. Fig. 6. Visualization of florentine marriage dataset Fig. 7. gaussian distribution contours of the distribution fit to the dataset Ruchi Mittal et al. / Procedia Computer Science 125 (2018) 609 616 615 Fig. 8.Nodes highled with red traingle are anomolous nodes 4. Conclusion In this paper, we present an approach for detecting anomalies in multiplex networks. From our research, we believe this is the initial effort to detect anomalies in the multiplexed network. These works encourage us to dig more knowledge from multiplex networks. There are number of ways to extend this work such as we may apply the proposed algorithm to directed or weighted multiplex networks. References [1] M. E. J. Newman, Networks: An introduction , Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2010. [2] Qi Ding, Natallia Katenka, Paul Barford, Eric D. Kolaczyk, and Mark Crovella. Intrusion as (anti)social communication: characterization and detection. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD), Beijing, China, pages 886 894. ACM, 2012. [3] Brigitte Boden, Stephan Gunnemann, Holger Hoffmann, and Thomas Seidl. Mining coherent subgraphs in multi-layer graphs with edge labels. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD), Beijing, China, pages 1258 1266. ACM, 2012a. [4] Corinna Cortes and Daryl Pregibon. Signature-based methods for data streams. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 5(3):167 182, 2001. [5] V. L. F. Battiston, V. Nicosia, Structural measures for multiplex networks, Physical Review E, vol. 89, 032804, 2014. [6] M. Kivela, A. Arenas, M. Barthelemy, J. Gleeson, Y. Moreno, and M. Porter, Multilayer networks, Journal of Complex Networks, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 203 271, 2014. [7] U Kang, Jay-Yoon Lee, Danai Koutra, and Christos Faloutsos. Net-Ray: Visualizing and mining web-scale graphs. In Proceedings of the 18th Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (PAKDD), Tainan, Taiwan, 2014. [8] Heli Sun, Jianbin Huang, Jiawei Han, Hongbo Deng, Peixiang Zhao, and Boqin Feng. gskeletonclu: Density-based network clustering via structure-connected tree division or agglomeration. In Proceedings of the 10th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), Sydney, Australia, pages 481 490. IEEE Computer Society, 2010. [9] Charu C. Aggarwal and Philip S. Yu. Outlier detection for high dimensional data. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), Santa Barbara, CA, pages 37 46. ACM, 2001. [10] Vydunas Saltenis. Outlier detection based on the distribution of distances between data points. Informatica (Lithuanian Academy of Sciences), 15(3):399 410, 2004. [11] David J. Miller and John Browning. A mixture model and em-based algorithm for class discovery, robust classification, and outlier rejection in mixed labeled/unlabeled data sets. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 25(11):1468 1483, 2003. [12] Charu Aggarwal and Karthik Subbian. Evolutionary network analysis: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 2014. [13] A. A. M. De Domenico, M.A. Porter, Muxviz: a tool for multilayer analysis and visualization of networks, Journal of Complex Networks, pp. 1 18, 2014 [14] C. Stark, B.-J. Breitkreutz, T. Reguly, L. Boucher, A. Breitkreutz, and M. Tyers. - "Biogrid: a general repository for interaction datasets" - Nucleic Acids Research 2006 34 (1) D535 D539 [15] JF Padgett, CK Ansell - "Robust Action and the Rise of the Medici, 1400-1434". American journal of sociology, 1259-1319 (1993) [16] S. Boccaletti, G. Bianconi, R. Criado, C. I. del Genio, J. Go mez- Garden es, M. Romance, I. Sendin a-Nadal, Z. Wang and M. Zanin, The structure and dynamics of multilayer networks , Phys. Reps. 544 (2014) no. 1, 1 122. [17] M. De Domenico, A. So le-Ribalta, E. Cozzo, M. Kivela , Y. Moreno, M. A. Porter, S. Go mez and A. Arenas, Mathematical formulation of multilayer networks , Phys. Rev. X 3 (2013) 041022. 616 Ruchi Mittal et al. / Procedia Computer Science 125 (2018) 609 616 [18] A. Sole -Ribalta, M. De Domenico, S. Go mez, and A. Arenas, Central- ity rankings in multiplex networks, in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM Conference on Web Science, ser. WebSci 14, 2014, pp. 149 155. [19] Tanmoy Chakraborty, Ramasuri Narayanam. Cross-layer Betweenness Centrality in Multiplex Networks with Applications , ICDE (2016) [20] Jimeng Sun, Huiming Qu, Deepayan Chakrabarti, and Christos Faloutsos. Neighborhood formation and anomaly detection in bipartite graphs. In Proceedings of the 5th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), Houston, TX, pages 418 425. IEEE Computer Society, 2005 [21] Zoltan Gy ongyi, Hector Garcia-Molina, and Jan Pedersen. Combating web spam with trustrank. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), Toronto, Canada, pages 576 587, 2004. [22] Lei Li, Chieh-Jan Mike Liang, Jie Liu, Suman Nath, Andreas Terzis, and Christos Faloutsos. Thermocast: A cyber-physical forecasting model for data centers. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD), San Diego, CA. ACM, 2011b.