Intravoxel Incoherent Motion (IVIM) and Multi-parametric MRI Analysis for Chemotherapy Response Evaluation in Bone Tumor Esha Baidya Kayal CENTRE FOR BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY DELHI OCTOBER 2020 Indian Institute of Technology Delhi (IITD), New Delhi, 2020 Intravoxel Incoherent Motion (IVIM) and Multi-parametric MRI Analysis for Chemotherapy Response Evaluation in Bone Tumor by Esha Baidya Kayal Centre for Biomedical Engineering Submitted In fulfillment of the requirements of the degree of Doctor of Philosophy to the INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY DELHI OCTOBER 2020 Dedicated to my Parents i CERTIFICATE This is to certify that the thesis entitled Intravoxel Incoherent Motion (IVIM) and Multi- parametric MRI analysis for Chemotherapy Response Evaluation in Bone Tumor , being submitted by Mrs. Esha Baidya Kayal, to the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, for the award of Doctor of Philosophy in Centre for Biomedical Engineering is a record of the bonafide research work carried out by her under our supervision and guidance. She has fulfilled the requirements for submission of this thesis, which to the best of our knowledge has reached the requisite standard. The materials contained in the thesis has not been submitted in part or full to any other University or Institute for the award of any other degree or diploma. Date: New Delhi Dr. Amit Mehndiratta Associate Professor Centre for Biomedical Engineering Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi Dr. Devasenathipathy Kandasamy Additional Professor Department of Radio Diagnosis All India Institute of Medical Science, Delhi 16/10/2020 ii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my chief supervisor Dr. Amit Mehndiratta. He has been a true mentor throughout my PhD with his knowledge, continuous guidance, critical comments, suggestions and encouragement. I should not forget to mention the constant work-schedules and the non-negotiable time-lines of the deliverables, which motivated me the most to work hard and bring out the best possible output. Honestly expressing, Dr. Amit has redefined my capabilities and I will be ever indebted to him for that. He is my guru in the true spirit. I would like to thank my co-supervisor Dr. Devasenathipathy Kandasamy for enriching me with his clinical knowledge throughout my PhD. I must mention his guidance, thoughtful suggestions and encouragement in all stages of my PhD and he handled all my endless queries regarding radiological interpretation and explanation of pathology with remarkable patience. Next, I must thank my clinical research team at AIIMS, Delhi. Dr. Sameer Bakhshi facilitated the patient recruitment at his OPD in IRCH, AIIMS, Delhi. He provided me the important clinical knowledge about osteosarcoma cancer biology and chemotherapy treatment management and useful suggestions and advice whenever it was required. The patience and care with which he deals with his patients is worth witnessing. My attitude towards life has changed positively after being in his association. I would also like to express my deep gratitude to Dr. Raju Sharma, Department of Radiology, AIIMS, Delhi for his succinct suggestions, advice and encouragement all through my PhD. I am grateful to my respected research committee members at IIT Delhi for their valuable feedback and suggestions time to time. I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Dr Kedar Khare for his critical analysis, suggestions and guidance in the methodological development of my thesis. I must thank Dr. Anup Singh for his constant support and encouragement. His thoughtful suggestions throughout my PhD made my project better. Dr. Veena Koul as the chairperson of my research committee provided me valuable advice and encouragement throughout. I would like to express my thanks to all the faculty members and office staff in our center. I must thank the nursing team and the support staff at medical oncology OPD in IRCH, AIIMS, Delhi, for their sincere cooperation during patient recruitment and the MRI technician iii team under Department of Radiology, AIIMS, Delhi, for their help during MRI acquisition. There are many days the team worked extra hours to get my cases done, despite the huge patient load. I would like to thank the participating patients who provided the most important contribution to carry out this research work. Inspite of their illness and painful pathological condition with such a morbid tumor like osteosarcoma, they gave their consent for participation and cooperated during MRI acquisition. Without them this research would not be possible. Their sufferings have made me humble and realize the blessings I have in life. and I sincerely pray for their cure and comfort. I am thankful to all my lab-mates, especially Neha, Anirban, Ayan, Snekha, Rafeek, Dinil, Rupsha, Sandeep, Dharmesh, Archana, Virender, Debashish, Shruti, Rakshit, Sameer, Banasmita, and Neha for their encouragement and comradeship and making this journey memorable and enjoyable. I would also express my acknowledgment and affection to the intern team, Abhimanyu, Rishabh, Akshay, Kabir, Sneha, and Nikhil for their valuable input in data processing and implementation of various stages of segmentation algorithms. Mentoring them was a good learning experience for me. I acknowledge and thank the Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India for providing the research fellowship funds required for my PhD. I would also like to thank DBT, INSA, CSIR, ICMR and IITD research scholar fund for providing me travel grant award for attending international conferences. Special thanks and gratitude to my parents and elder sister for their love and blessing. Their support is the backbone of my success. I am grateful to my friend, Thilaka for her support and encouragement and being with me at all ups and downs. This list is incomplete if I do not mention Sulagna, Souvik, Sudipta and Jeeva, who constantly encouraged me throughout the course of my PhD. Last but not the least, I would like to thank my husband for his unstinting belief in me. He always pushes limits for me and is the only reason why I joined IIT. Words are not enough to thank him for all the patience and support he has given me always. Such comfortable burning of the midnight oil would not have been possible without his understanding. Being a part of MedImg research team at CBME is a great experience and my PhD in this eminent Institution like IIT Delhi has been a great journey. I shall be thankful to almighty forever for giving me such an opportunity and providing me enough luck to successfully and timely complete my PhD research work. (Esha Baidya Kayal) iv ABSTRACT Osteosarcoma is the most common bone sarcoma and the third most common malignancy in children and adolescents with high morbidity and mortality. Early evaluation of chemotherapy response may help to prevent the patients from undergoing ineffective chemotherapy regimen, reducing side-effects, saving treatment time, cost and may improve patient management through personalized therapeutic options. The goal of this PhD thesis was to investigate the role of non- invasive imaging-based markers for monitoring and evaluating early therapeutic response in patients with osteosarcoma receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy using Intravoxel incoherent motion (IVIM) and mutli-parametric MRI analysis. Existing challenges in literature regarding anti- cancer therapeutic response evaluation in bone tumor were attempted to be addressed in this PhD research work. The first objective of this thesis was to develop the methodology for reliable and reproducible IVIM parameter estimation as the existing widely used IVIM analysis methodologies, viz bi- exponential (BE) model and segmented BE techniques, evaluate IVIM parameters at each voxel independently, overlooking the spatial context in tissue which may lead to unreliable noisy solutions. To achieve this goal, two gradient-based adaptive penalty functions, Total Variation (TV) and Huber penalty function (HPF) were incorporated into the non-linear least-square (NLLS) optimization of standard BE model and two novel IVIM analysis methodologies 1) BE model with Total Variation Penalty function (BE+TV), and 2) BE model with Huber Penalty function (BE+HPF) were developed. Proposed BE+TV and BE+HPF methods, adaptively adjust the NNLS error and reduce the non-physiological spatial inhomogeneity and noise in parameter estimation by using TV/HPF penalty reduction at each iteration of NNLS optimization to produce reliable v and reproducible parametric images. Experimental results using simulation and empirical clinical datasets showed quantitatively and qualitatively improved IVIM parameter estimation by proposed BE+TV and BE+HPF methodologies than the existing BE and segmented BE techniques. The performance of the two developed methodologies were similar. The second objective was to assess the potential of quantitative IVIM analysis for characterizing and evaluating early chemotherapeutic response in patients with osteosarcoma. IVIM parameters such as diffusion coefficient (D), perfusion coefficient (D*) and perfusion fraction (f) were evaluated using state of the art IVIM analysis methodology BE+TV along with apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and histogram analysis was performed for these parameters. Experimental results demonstrated the potential of IVIM analysis for evaluating chemotherapy response in osteosarcoma with correlation to both the radiological and the histopathological response evaluation measurements as the reference standards. IVIM perfusion-related parameters (D*, f) and their histogram parameters - standard-deviation, energy and entropy were effective to be used as surrogate markers for characterizing heterogeneity in tumor micro-vasculature and its changes during chemotherapy in osteosarcoma. The third objective was to develop a robust and novel automated methodology to delineate, visualize and quantify the proportion of necrosis and viable tissue present within the tumor and eventually evaluate the chemotherapeutic response using multi-parametric MRI. To achieve this goal, Simple linear iterative clustering supervoxel (SLICs) and Otsu multi-thresholding (Mth) were combined to develop the proposed SLICs+MTh methodology; while the former technique clusters the voxels with similar intensity levels in close proximity and latter technique selects and combines the clusters to sub-segment the targeted pathological region within the tumor. The proposed methodology SLICs+MTh is non-invasive and imaging based and uses diffusion vi weighted image (DWI), T2 weighted fat-saturated image and ADC parametric map. SLICs+MTh was applied to the tumor before and after the chemotherapy regimen and it produced reliable approximation of amount of macro-necrosis and viable tumor volume in osteosarcoma which was in satisfactory agreement with the estimated histopathological necrosis after surgery. The fourth objective was to assess the efficacy of multi-parametric 3D statistical texture analysis in characterizing tumor microstructure and its changes during chemotherapy in osteosarcoma and evaluating early therapeutic response. To meet the purpose, textural features based on Gray-level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM), Neighborhood gray-tone difference matrix (NGTDM) and Run length matrix (RLM) were evaluated on T1W, T2W & DWI images and ADC, D, D* & f parametric maps. A linear discriminant analysis was performed to find the potential surrogate markers for tumor aggressiveness and responsiveness to chemotherapy. NGTDM features coarseness, busyness and strength for D, D* & f and T1W, T2W images, acquired even before start of the chemotherapy; were found to be useful markers for predicting tumor aggressiveness and prognosis. GLCM features contrast, correlation; NGTDM features contrast, complexity and RLM features short run low gray-level emphasis; for D, D* & f and the T2W image, were found to be effective markers for chemotherapy response early in the course of treatment. This PhD research work developed methodologies for reliable quantitative IVIM parameter estimation and identified imaging-based markers for monitoring and evaluating chemotherapeutic response in osteosarcoma by applying various analyses using IVIM and multi-parametric MRI. The research findings of this thesis might help the oncologist and radiologists in performing early prediction and evaluation of the chemotherapy response in patients with osteosarcoma and therefore might be beneficial for the patients by enabling personalized treatment regime. vii # 1 4 9 4 , < > @ A < -DE H - N N O Q OS >T V , O N [ @ A N N 1 \-O A , N , ^ _ [ > H ` V a O A f , # [ @ A N O Q [ > H OS >T S Q h _ A ( . . . .) V 9- nh o p - # q , - r \ N Q V \ A, 1 4 A [ > H OS >T V Q s S n H A S @ [ O > o 1 , ` 1 \ . . . . @ Q \O 9 ` Q ; _ > ^ u > . . . . ` 1 9 , _ A ( . .) w . . 9 @, # S \ N OH _ A # x u . . . . @ V , ` 1 V f O z Q , { w - r 9 V 9 _ , r ( 9. .) V 9 _ ( . . .) . . - 9S - 9# - #_ ( . . . .) O>T Q > . . . . viii ` 1 ` [ 1) . . r V 9 _ ( . .+ 9. .), 2) V 9 _ . . ( . .+ . . .) ` Q > O# ` . .+ 9. . . .+ . . . ` [ , ` 1 \ . . . . @ Q 9. ./ . . . V 9 _ o . . . . @ V . . . . O>T A @ > - 9r # S S 9 > . z S o O H r \ > O# ` . .+ 9. . . .+ . . . ` [ . . w . . @ N A x H H u . . . . @ > ` Q o S @ O \ o 1 , # [ @ A O Q N OS >T V Q x H . . . . ` 1 N q H S . . . . ` 1 o S . .+ 9. . . . . . @ > w ( ), ( *) ( ) A A w ( . . .) V > @ Q [ x ` 1 > O H r @ \ @ u A ` > - [ > H H OS >T ` S 9q p OS >T , @ N OS >T V Q . . . . ` 1 N q O \ > N # A f - n r \ @ A ` [ Q \ u A . . . . [ @ ( *, ix ) [ x @ # \- ` , h O o 1 # Q o S ` , V 9- nh . . . r 4 N OS >T V > f Q Q 9S n _ # r _ ( . . .Q . .) V 9- V ( . 9. .) o S @ _ > O# ` . . .Q . .+ . 9. . \O 9 ` Q > ; > \ 9 AQ 9 _ { N q H q x@ - w Q S _ # @ O# ` \O 9 . . .Q . .+ . 9. . - # q OS S - r w - , 92- - . . . OS S . . .Q . .+ . 9. . \O 9 N A > # A # - r 4 N x ` 1 V [ > H S ` S 9q p r A o 1 # A N T #h_ r \ @ [ O Q [ > H OS >T V A V 9- nh 3 _ ` 1 N O r o 1 Q , 91- , 92- w - . . ., . . ., , * @ N x OS S { - - nh_ ( . . . .), { - w A nh_ ( . . 9. . .) A nh_ ( . . .) V > N T N OS OS >T Q ` \ Q 9S w #TQ ` 1 > N N D N T S N \ Q ; , * @ N OS S 91- , 92- . . . V > . . 9. . . ` # , Q # #hA \ O Q N OS >T Q ; , * @ N OS S 92- . . . V > . . . . ` h # , ; . . 9. . . ` h # , z _ 9; . . . ` \- -{ - Q O \ \ ` 1 x H . . . . @ Q \O 9 ` Q > 4 # A N ` N S OS >T V Q . . . . V 9- nh . . . ` Q ` 1 @ OS S - r \ N 4 S 4 -[ > H @ ` > -[ > H @ # [ @ A N OS >T N \ O Q V O \ A Q u ^ _ ^ # q [ @ Q xi CONTENTS CERTIFICATE i ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS . ii ABSTRACT ... iv CONTENTS .................................................................................................. xi LIST OF FIGURES .. xvii LIST OF TABLES xxvii GLOSSARY .. . . .. xxxii Chapter 1: Introduction and Literature Review 1.1 Motivation behind the thesis ... . 1 1.2 Background knowledge & literature review 4 1.2.1 Osteosarcoma . 4 1.2.1.1 Biologic behavior of osteosarcoma 5 1.2.1.2 Clinical presentation of osteosarcoma 6 1.2.1.3 Diagnosis .... 7 1.2.1.4 Treatment .... 8 1.2.1.5 Treatment response evaluation: RECIST1.1 criteria and Histopathological evaluation .... 9 1.2.1.6 Literature review on chemotherapeutic response evaluation of osteosarcoma 9 1.2.2 Basics of Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) ... 12 1.2.3 Diffusion MRI and Intravoxel Incoherent Motion (IVIM) . 14 1.2.3.1 Diffusion MRI . 13 1.2.3.2 Intravoxel incoherent motion (IVIM) .. 18 1.2.3.3 Mathematical models of IVIM . 19 1.2.3.4 Advantage of IVIM over DWI . 20 1.2.3.5 IVIM Perfusion versus Classical Perfusion .. 22 1.2.3.6 Literature review of IVIM bi-exponential model fitting methods 24 1.2.3.7 Literature review of IVIM in oncology . 25 xii 1.2.4 Multiparametric MRI analysis for therapeutic response evaluation in osteosarcoma 30 1.2.5 Texture analysis 33 1.2.5.1 Literature review of statistical texture analysis in oncology using MRI . 33 1.3 Materials and Methods . 35 1.3.1 Sample size calculation 35 1.3.2 Patient recruitment ... 36 1.3.3 Treatment Protocol .. 37 1.3.4 Subjects 37 1.3.5 Data acquisition 38 1.3.6 Treatment response assessment 39 1.3.7 Data processing platform and computation information .. 41 1.4 Thesis objective and outline .. 42 1.4.1 Thesis Objectives .. 42 1.4.2 Thesis outline 42 Chapter 2: Development of IVIM analysis Methodology Using Regularization Based Functional Approach 2.1 Rationale behind the proposed methodology . 44 2.2 Proposed IVIM analysis methods: Bi-exponential model with Total variation penalty (BE+TV) and Bi-exponential model with Huber penalty function (BE+HPF) . 45 2.2.1 Theory ... 45 2.2.2 Formulation of TV and HPF Based Regularized Parameter Estimation .. 46 2.3 Evaluate the proposed BE+TV and BE+HPF methods . 49 2.3.1 Simulation Data . 49 2.3.2 Empirical Clinical Data . 50 2.3.3 Analysis Methods .. 51 2.3.4 Error Calculations .. 52 2.3.5 Results 53 2.4 Significance of proposed BE+TV and BE+HPF methodologies in Clinical Application 65 2.4.1 Methods .... .. 65 2.4.2 Results .. 66 xiii 2.5 Scan-rescan reproducibility of proposed BE+TV and BE+HPF methodologies . 75 2.5.1 Methods ... 75 2.5.2 Results . 75 2.6 Discussion ... 80 2.7 Conclusions . 84 Chapter 3: IVIM for Tissue Characterization and Chemotherapeutic Response Assessment of Osteosarcoma in Comparison with Clinical Standard RECIST1.1 and Histopathological Necrosis 3.1 Introduction . 85 3.2 Image analysis . 86 3.3 Tissue Characterization ... 87 3.3.1 Study population and statistical analysis ... 87 3.3.2 Results 87 3.4 Chemotherapeutic response evaluation in Osteosarcoma with correlation to RECIST1.1 Criteria ... 89 3.4.1 Study population and RECIST1.1 criteria for treatment response evaluation .. 89 3.4.2 Data analysis .. 89 3.4.3 Results 90 3.4.4 Discussion .. 99 3.4.5 Conclusion . 102 3.5 Chemotherapeutic response evaluation in Osteosarcoma with correlation to histopathological necrosis . 103 3.5.1 Study population and Histopathological examination for treatment response evaluation . 103 3.5.2 Data analysis . 103 3.5.3 Results .. 104 3.5.4 Discussion 114 3.5.5 Conclusion ... 119 3.6 Conclusions 119 xiv Chapter 4: Non-invasive Chemotherapeutic Response Evaluation of Osteosarcoma using Multi-parametric MRI 4.1 Introduction . 120 4.2 Study population and Response Groups . 122 4.3 Proposed methodology ... 122 4.3.1 Background knowledge 122 4.3.2 Image analysis .. 124 4.3.2.1 Pre-processing .. 124 4.3.2.2 SLICs+MTh based sub-segmentation within tumor 125 4.3.3 Accuracy calculation and validation 131 4.4 Results . 132 4.5 Discussion ... 139 4.6 Conclusions . 142 Chapter 5: Texture analysis for Non-invasive Tumor Detection and Chemotherapeutic Response Evaluation in Osteosarcoma 5.1 Introduction . 143 5.2 Statistical texture analysis methods . 144 5.3 Textural feature evaluation . 151 5.4 Tissue characterization 154 5.4.1 Methods . 154 5.4.2 Results 154 5.4.3 Discussion .. 155 5.5 Texture Analysis for evaluating tumor aggressiveness and mortality . 156 5.5.1 Methods .. 156 5.5.2 Results 157 5.5.3 Discussion .. 159 5.6 Texture Analysis for therapeutic response evaluation with correlation to histopathological necrosis ..162 xv 5.6.1 Methods .. 162 5.6.2 Results 165 5.6.3 Discussion .. 169 5.7 Conclusions ..... 173 Chapter 6: Conclusions and Future Directions 6.1 Conclusions . .. 174 6.2 Major Contributions .. 175 6.3 Future Directions .. 176 6.3.1 Multivariate Logistic Regression Analysis for Predicting Tumor Aggressiveness and Responsiveness to Chemotherapy .. 178 Appendix I: Additional Simulation Setup for Testing Proposed IVIM Analysis Methodologies BE+TV and BE+HPF Appendix I.1 Simulation setup ........................................................................................... 183 Appendix I.2 Results .. 183 Appendix II: Performance of Individual Textural Features for Tissue Characterization and Predicting Tumor Aggressiveness and Responsiveness to Chemotherapy Appendix II.1 Textural features in discriminating tumor and healthy muscle tissue .... 186 Appendix II.2 Textural features for predicting tumor aggressiveness and responsiveness to chemotherapy . 190 Appendix III: Computer Aided System for Automatic Segmentation and RECIST Score Evaluation in Osteosarcoma using Diffusion MRI Appendix III.1 Introduction ................................................................................................ 193 Appendix III.2 Materials and Methods .. . 196 Appendix III.2.1 Dataset .. . 196 Appendix III.2.2 RECIST1.1 and Volumetric-response score . 196 xvi Appendix III.2.3 Ground truth Preparation: Manual Tumor Segmentation and RECIST1.1 and Volumetric-response Score Measurement . 197 Appendix III.2.4 Identification of best performing Segmentation algorithm(s) using DWI . 198 Appendix III.2.5 CAD System for Automatic Tumor Segmentation and RECIST1.1 and Volumetric-response Score Measurement .. 200 Appendix III.2.6 Accuracy calculation. . 201 Appendix III.3 Results ... . 204 Appendix III.3.1 Identification of best segmentation algorithm(s) using DWI 204 Appendix III.3.2 CAD System for Automatic Tumor Segmentation and RECIST1.1 and Volumetric-response Score Measurement ...... 208 Appendix III.4 Discussion 215 Appendix III.5 Conclusions . 220 Appendix IV: Sample Patient Information Sheet & Patient Information Consent Form 221 Appendix V: Publication from Current Research . 227 References .. 232 About The Author 257 xvii LIST OF FIGURES Figure 1.1: Biologic growth pattern of Osteosarcomas. (Illustration was reused with permission from the article by Bickels et al. (75)). Figure 1.2: Precession of Magnetization M0 around the external magnetic field B0 with Larmor frequency . Figure 1.3: Three types of molecular motion (indicated by arrows) in biological tissue. Figure 1.4: The Pulsed Gradient Spin Echo (PGSE) sequence. g - gradient amplitude, - duration of the sensitizing gradient, - time between the two sensitizing gradient lobes. Figure 1.5: Diffusion-weighted signal and Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) in osteosarcoma in right distal femur. a) Diffusion-weighted image (DWI) at b=800 sec/mm2. Tumor area (black outline) shows less signal attenuation and appears with higher signal intensity than healthy soft tissue (white outline). b) ADC map. Tumor area (black outline) with lower ADC values is darker than healthy soft tissue with higher ADC values (black outline). Contrast on ADC map is observed as opposite of the DWI. c) Schematic diagram shows derivation of ADC. Relative DWI signal intensities against b-values are plotted along y-axis and x-axis respectively. Slope of line (ADC) is smaller for tumor (black line) than for healthy soft tissue (gray line). Figure 1.6: Model of biologic tissue proposed by Le Bihan et al. (37) (Illuatration was reused with permission from the article). A biologic tissue includes a volume fraction f of water flowing (f) and diffusing (a) in perfused capillaries, and a fraction (1 - f) of diffusing in extracellular (b) and intracellular (c) spaces and between those two compartments (e). There are water exchanges between intra & extra-vascular space (d). Figure 1.7: Mono-exponential (ME) (dotted line) and Bi-exponential (BE) (solid line) fitting of relative IVIM signal attenuation (hollow circles). At lower b value ( 200 sec/mm2) there is a steeper slope (A) of signal attenuation that can be attributed to microcapillary perfusion whereas, xviii at larger b values (>200 sec/mm2), the slope (B) of signal attenuation is less steep, which is more reflective of tissue diffusivity (This illustration was adapted from the article by Koh et al. (94)). Figure 1.8: Imaging techniques providing information about tumor biology and microenvironment. Illustration was reused from the article by Garc a-Figueiras et al. (192) (license: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Figure 1.9: Patient demographic information and tumor characteristics. Figure 2.1: The reference parametric images for A) Diffusion coefficient (D), B) Perfusion coefficient (D*) and C) Perfusion fraction (f) for Simulation-I, II & III respectively. I XV) Estimated parameter maps for D, XVI XXX) estimated parameter maps for D* and XXXI XLV) estimated parameter maps for f by five methods at three SNRS0 of 60, 25 and 15. Figure 2.2: Estimated parameter maps for A) Diffusion Coefficient (D), B) Perfusion Coefficient (D*) and C) Perfusion Fraction (f) for Simulation-IV. I-XV) Estimated parameter maps for D, XVI-XXX) estimated parameter maps for D* and XXXI-XLV) estimated parameter maps for f by three methods at three SNRS0 of 60, 25 and 15. Figure 2.3: a. DWI (b = 800 s/mm2) of one representative patient (M, 15 yrs) with OS in right distal femur, red circle shows the tumor; i v) Diffusion coefficient (D); vi x) Perfusion coefficient (D*), xi xv) Perfusion fraction (f) estimated with five analysis methods. b. DWI (b = 800 s/mm2) of one representative patient (F, 35 yrs) with ESFT in left-upper anterior chest wall, red circle shows the tumor; xvi xx) Diffusion coefficient (D); xxi xxv) Perfusion coefficient (D*), xxvi xxx) Perfusion fraction (f) estimated with five analysis methods. Parametric images with BE+TV and BE+HPF are showing comparatively less image noise. Figure 2.4: a, f) DWI image (b = 800 s/mm2) of a representative patient (M, 15 years) with Osteosarcoma (same patient in Figure 2.3.a); b, g) ADC; c, h) Diffusion coefficient (D); d, i) Perfusion coefficient (D*); e, j) Perfusion fraction (f). a e) Baseline; f j) Follow-up after 1 cycle of chemotherapy. Figures shows increase in ADC, D and reduction in D* in tumor post chemotherapy. k, p) DWI image (b = 800 sec/mm2) of a representative patient (F, 35 years) with Ewing s Sarcoma (same patient in Figure 2.3.b); l, q) ADC; m, r) Diffusion coefficient (D); n, s) Perfusion coefficient xix (D*); o, t) Perfusion fraction (f). k o) Baseline; p t) Follow-up after 2 cycles of chemotherapy. Figures show increase in ADC, D and f in tumor post chemotherapy. Figure 2.5: Data fitting curves in tumor and healthy tissue ROIs by five IVIM analysis methods 1) BE, 2) BESeg-2, 3) BESeg-1, 4) BE+TV and 5) BE+HPF for a representative patient (Male, 15 years) with osteosarcoma in right femur at three time-points A: Baseline (t1); B: 1st Follow-up (t1); and C: 2nd Follow-up (t2). For A, B and C: i) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2) with ROIs for tumor (red outline) and healthy tissue (blue outline); ii) Data fitting in tumor and iii) Data fitting in healthy tissue by five IVIM analysis methods. In all the plots, along X-axis: b-values (0 800 sec/mm2) and along Y-axis: relative signal intensity. Fitting curves in the range, b-value = 0 100 sec/mm2 are enlarged in the inset. Figure 2.6: i, iv, vii) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2); ii, v, viii) DWI with ROIs for tumor (red) and healthy tissue (blue); iii, vi, ix) Apparent Diffusion coefficient (ADC), of a representative patient (Male, 15 years) with osteosarcoma in right femur (same tumor slice as in Figure 2.4) at 3 time-points t0, t1 and t2 respectively. IVIM parametric maps estimated by five IVIM analysis methodologies 1) BE, 2) BESeg-2, 3) BESeg-1, 4) BE+TV and 5) BE+HPF at time-points t0, t1 and t2 are depicted in A) Diffusion coefficient (D), B) Perfusion coefficient (D*) and C) Perfusion fraction (f). [Figure 2.5 B, C continued in next page] Figure 2.7: Bland-Altman plots showing inter-scan agreement of estimated parameters, Diffusion coefficient (a, b c), Perfusion coefficient (d, e, f) and Perfusion fraction (g, h, i) by IVIM analysis method BE+TV between time-points t0 and t1 (1st column); time-points t0 and t2 (2nd column); and time-points t1 and t2 (3rd column) in healthy tissue volume. Figure 2.8: Bland-Altman plots showing inter-scan agreement of estimated parameters, Diffusion coefficient (a, b c), Perfusion coefficient (d, e, f) and Perfusion fraction (g, h, i) by IVIM analysis method BE+HPF between time-points t0 and t1 (1st column); time-points t0 and t2 (2nd column); and time-points t1 and t2 (3rd column) in healthy tissue volume. Figure 3.1: a) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2) axial slices of a representative patient (M, 15 years) with osteosarcoma in right distal femur; b) ROIs drawn for healthy (blue overlay) and tumor (red overlay) tissue; c) Original and fitted signals for BE+TV method in healthy and tumor tissue ROIs; xx d) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC); e) Diffusion coefficient (D); f) Perfusion coefficient (D*); g) Perfusion fraction (f). Figure 3.2: a-q) Images of a representative patient from PR group (M, 16 years) with OS in left tibia and tumor-diameter was 6.6cm, 6.5cm and 4cm at time points t0, t1 ( 1:2% decrement) and t2 ( 2:33% decrement) respectively. a,b) T2W fat-saturated image showing anatomical structure at time-points t0 and t2 respectively; c,d,e) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2); f,g,h) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC); i,j,k) Diffusion coefficient (D); l,m,n) Perfusion coefficient (D*); o,p,q) Perfusion fraction (f) at time points t0, t1 and t2 respectively. Both ADC & D in tumor demonstrated an increase; D* showed a decrease; f did not show much difference in tumor ROI after chemotherapy. Figure 3.3: a-q) Images of a representative patient from SD group (F, 15 years) with OS in left tibia in whom tumor-diameter was 8.5cm, 10cm and 7.2cm at time points t0, t1 ( 1:18% increment) and t2 ( 2:15% decrement) respectively. a,b) T2W fat-saturated image showing anatomical structure at time-points t0 and t2 respectively; c,d,e) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2); f,g,h) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC); i,j,k) Diffusion coefficient (D); l,m,n) Perfusion coefficient (D*); o,p,q) Perfusion fraction (f) at time points t0, t1 and t2 respectively. Both ADC&D in tumor demonstrated an increase; whereas D* showed an increment at t1, followed by a decrease at t2; f did not show much difference in tumor ROI after chemotherapy. Figure 3.4: a-q) Images of a representative patient from PD group (F, 30 years) with OS in left tibia in whom tumor-diameter was 10.4cm, 12.6cm and 11.5cm at time points t0, t1 ( 1:21% increment) and t2 ( 2:11% increment) respectively. a,b) T2W fat-saturated image showing anatomical structure at time-points t0 and t2 respectively; c,d,e) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2); f,g,h) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC); i,j,k) Diffusion coefficient (D); l,m,n) Perfusion coefficient (D*); o,p,q) Perfusion fraction (f) at time points t0, t1 and t2 respectively. Both ADC&D in tumor demonstrated an increase; whereas D* showed a decrement after at t1, followed by an increase at t2; f did not show much difference in tumor ROI after chemotherapy. Figure 3.5: Images of a representative patient from Response group (M, 18 years), with OS in right distal femur and >90% histological necrosis after surgery. 1st, 2nd and 3rd columns are showing images at time points t0 (before Chemotherapy), t1 (after 1st cycle of chemotherapy) and t2 (after completion of chemotherapy) respectively and 4th column is representing histograms of parametric maps at three time-points t0 (green), t1 (orange) and t2 (blue) mentioned. xxi a, b) T2-weighted fat saturated image; c, d, e) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2); f, g, h) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC); i) Histogram of ADC; j, k, l) Diffusion coefficient (D). m) Histogram of D; n, o, p) Perfusion coefficient (D*). q) Histogram of D; r, s, t) Perfusion fraction (f). u) Histogram of f; v, w, x) D*.f; y) Histogram of D*.f . Figure 3.6: Images of a representative patient from Non-Response group (M, 12 years), with OS in left tibia and <25% histological necrosis after surgery. 1st, 2nd and 3rd columns are showing images at time points t0 (before Chemotherapy), t1 (after 1st cycle of chemotherapy) and t2 (after completion of chemotherapy) respectively and 4th column is representing histograms of parametric maps at three time-points t0 (green), t1 (orange) and t2 (blue) mentioned. a, b) T2-weighted fat saturated image; c, d, e) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2); f, g, h) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC); i) Histogram of ADC; j, k, l) Diffusion coefficient (D). m) Histogram of D; n, o, p) Perfusion coefficient (D*). q) Histogram of D; r, s, t) Perfusion fraction (f). u) Histogram of f; v, w, x) D*.f; y) Histogram of D*.f . Figure 3.7: ROC curve analysis using mean and statistically significant (p<0.05) histogram parameters of ADC, D, D*, f and D*.f . a) At time point t0 (before commence of chemotherapy), parameters in combination produced AUC=0.92, sensitivity=85%, Specificity=92% in predicting Non-responders to chemotherapy. b) At time point t1, (after completion of 1st chemotherapy cycle), parameters in combination produced AUC=0.9, sensitivity=83%, specificity=92% in predicting Non-responders to chemotherapy. Figure 4.1: A) Simple Linear Iterative Clustering Supervoxels and Ostu Multi-Thresholding (SLICs+MTh) based sub-segmentation of Osteosarcoma into different pathological parts like edema, viable tumor and necrosis using Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI) at diffusion weighting factor b=800sec/mm2 (DWI800), T2 weighted fat-saturate (T2W-fatsat) image and Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC) map at baseline (pre-treatment) and 2nd follow-up (after completion of chemotherapy). c) B) Flow-diagram of proposed SLICs+MTh based sub-segmentation method. Figure 4.2: MRI images of one tumor slice from a representative patient (M, 16yrs) with Osteosarcoma in left tibia at A. Baseline (before commencement of chemotherapy) and B. 2nd follow-up (after completion of chemotherapy). xxii For A and B: a) T2 weighted fat-saturated images with demarked ROIs (Ground-Truth mask, red outline) for hyper-intense tumor and associated edema; b) SLICs+MTh based segmentation mask for tumor and associated edema (Mask1, red overlay) c) Diffusion weighted image at diffusion weighting factor b=800 sec/mm2 (DWI800) with demarked ROIs (Ground-Truth mask, blue outline) for hyper-intense tumor areas; d) SLICs+MTh based segmentation mask for tumor areas (Mask2, blue overlay); e) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) with demarked ROIs (Ground- Truth mask, green outline) for possible hyper-intense necrosis areas; f) SLICs+MTh based segmentation mask for necrosis areas (Mask3, green overlay). Figure 4.3: Box and whisker plots show the distribution of a) ADC-mean, b) ADC-entropy and c) hyper-parameter ADC-(mean entropy) values in patient cohort. Figure 4.4: a) Box and whisker plot showing amount of tumor necrosis computed by SLICs+MTh method at baseline and 2nd follow-up for patient groups below and above 50% histopathological necrosis and the amount of actual necrosis assessed by histopathological examination after surgical resection. There was no significant difference (p=0.26) between SLICs-based necrosis at follow- up and histopathological necrosis among all patients. b) Bland-Altman plot showing agreement between tumor necrosis computed by SLICs+MTh method at 2nd follow-up and histopathological necrosis for all patients. Figure 4.5: a) SLICs+MTh based segmented necrosis area in axial ADC map (blue outline) of a representative patient (F, 27years) with osteosarcoma in left femur from Responder group; b) Demarcated necrosis area (red outline) in corresponding post-contrast T1W image from the same patient. HPE slide images at c) and d) depict large area of necrosis of different components of osteosarcoma (solid arrow) and e) shows area of viable tumor with hyalinization (hollow arrow). f) SLICs+MTh based necrosis area in axial ADC map (blue outline) of a representative patient (F, 16years) with osteosarcoma in right distal femur from No-responder group; g) Demarcated necrosis area (red outline) in corresponding post-contrast T1W slice from the same patient. HPE slide images at h), i) and j) depict large viable areas of osteosarcoma (hollow arrow) and area of necrosis (solid arrow). xxiii Figure 4.6. A, B: SLICs+MTh based segmentation of DWI, T2W-fatsat and ADC map and mask generation for tumor, edema and necrosis in a tumor slice of a representative patient (F, 12 years) from Responder group with osteosarcoma in right femur at A. Baseline and B. 2nd follow-up. For A and B: a, d, g) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2), T2W-fatsat, ADC map respectively; b, e, h) Supervoxels generation on DWI, T2W-fatsat, and ADC map respectively; c, f, i) Segmented Mask(tumor), Mask(tumor+edema) and Mask(necrosis) from b, e and h respectively; j) Final segmentation. Figure 4.7. A, B: SLICs+MTh based segmentation of DWI, T2W-fatsat and ADC map and mask generation for tumor, edema and necrosis in a tumor slice of a representative patient (M, 16 years) from Non-responder group with osteosarcoma in left tibia at A. Baseline and B. 2nd follow-up. For A and B: a, d, g) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2), T2W-fatsat, ADC map respectively; b, e, h) Supervoxels generation on DWI, T2W-fatsat, and ADC map respectively; c, f, i) Segmented Mask(tumor), Mask(tumor+edema) and Mask(necrosis) from b, e and h respectively; j) Final segmentation. Figure 5.1: Eight nearest-neighbor pixels are used to describe pixel connectivity for calculating GLCM for an image. Cells 1 and 5 show the horizontal (PH), 4 and 8 the right-diagonal (PRD), 3 and 7 the vertical (PV) and 2 and 6 the left-diagonal (PLD ) nearest-neighbors of the pixel P at center. Figure 5.2: Example of an 4x4 image with four unique gray-levels and calculation of GLCM in horizontal direction (PH) at a co-occurrence distance of 1. Figure 5.3: Example demonstrates the formation of a NGTDM (201). Left, 5x5 image with five unique gray-levels. Right, the resulting NGTDM. Figure 5.4: Example demonstrates the formation of a RLM. Left, 4x4 image with four unique gray-levels. Right, the resulting RLM in the direction 00. Figure 5.5: T1W, T2W non-fat-saturated and fat-saturated, DWI800 images and ADC, D, D* and f parametric maps from a representative patient (M, 16years) with osteosarcoma in left tibia with ROIs drawn for tumor (red) and healthy (blue) tissue. xxiv Figure 5.6: A. Images of a representative patient (Male, 19 years) from Non-survivor group with osteosarcoma in right tibia at baseline. B. Images of a representative patient (Male, 18 years) from Survivor group with osteosarcoma in left femur at baseline. For A and B: a) T2-weighted; b) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2); c) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC); d) Diffusion coefficient (D); e) Perfusion coefficient (D*) and f) Perfusion fraction (f). Figure 5.7: Distribution of statistically significant (p<0.05) textural features a) Histogram: mean, b) GLCM: sum-average, c) GLCM: variance, d) GLCM: autocorrelation, e) NGTDM: coarseness, f) NGTDM: busyness, g) NGTDM: strength and h) RLM: HGRE in D* map producing AUC 0.75 in classifying among Survivor and Non-survivor groups at baseline. Figure 5.8: A. a-u) Images of a representative patient from Res group (Male, 18 years, >90% necrosis in histopathological assessment) with osteosarcoma in right distal femur. B. a-u) Images of a representative patient from NRes group (Male, 18 years, <30% necrosis in histopathological assessment) with osteosarcoma in left femur (same patient in Figure 5.2.B). For A and B: a, b) T1W; c, d) T2W nonfat-saturated; e, f) T2W fat-saturated images at baseline (t0) and 2nd follow-up (t2) respectively; g,h,i) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2); j, k, l) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC); m, n, o) Diffusion coefficient (D); p, q, r) Perfusion coefficient (D*); s, t, u) Perfusion fraction (f) at baseline (t0), 1st follow-up (t1) and 2nd follow-up (t2) respectively. Figure 5.9: Distributions of statistically significant (p<0.05) textural features among response groups effective in evaluating chemotherapy response in osteosarcoma before or early in the course of treatment. Individually these features produced sensitivity & specificity of 70-90% for both and AUC=0.70-0.83 in predicting Responder and Non-responder groups: a) f13 (NGTDM: complexity) in T2W-nonfatsat; b) f2, (GLCM: contrast), c) f5 (GLCM: correlation) and d) f22 (RLM: SRLGE) in D* map; e) f2, (GLCM: contrast), f) f5 (GLCM: correlation), g) f11, (NGTDM: contrast) and h) f13, (NGTDM: complexity) in f map. Appendix I Figure 1: Estimated parameter maps for Diffusion Coefficient (D), Perfusion Coefficient (D*) and Perfusion Fraction (f) by BE, BEseg-1, BSseg-2, BE+TV and BE+HPF methods at SNR=25. xxv Appendix I Figure 2: Relative Bias (1st row), relative SD of error (2nd row), and relative RMS error (3rd row) of the IVIM parameter estimation methods BE, BEseg-1, BEseg-2, BE+TV, BE+HPF at different SNR levels of 100, 50, 25, 12.5. Appendix III Figure 1: Illustrative example of a) T2 weighted fat-saturated image; b) Diffusion weighted image with b=800sec/mm2; c) Manual annotation and measurement of maximum Tumor-diameter; d) Manually drawn region of interest for tumor, from a representative patient (M, 15y) with osteosarcoma in left tibia. Appendix III Figure 2: Illustrative example of Tumor segmentation using SLIC-Supervoxels and Fuzzy C-mean Clustering algorithms and Tumor-diameter evaluation using Connected Component analysis, from a representative patient (M, 15y) with osteosarcoma in left tibia. Appendix III Figure 3: a) T2W fat-saturated image and b) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2) of a representative patient (M, 15 years) with osteosarcoma in right tibia; c) Ground-truth for tumor ROI (red outline) demarcated by radiologist; Gray-level Co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) feature maps: d) Contrast; e) Correlation; f) Energy; g) Homogeneity and Gray-Level Run-Length Matrix (GLRLM) feature maps: h) Short Run Emphasis (SRE); i) Long Run Emphasis (LRE); j) Gray- Level Nonuniformity (GLN); k) Run-Length Nonuniformity (RLN); l) Run Percentage (RP); m) Low Gray-Level Run Emphasis (LGRE); n) High Gray-Level Run Emphasis (HGRE); o) Short Run Low Gray-Level Emphasis (SRLGE); p) Short Run High Gray-Level Emphasis (SRHGE); q) Long Run Low Gray-Level Emphasis (LRLGE) and r) Long Run High Gray-Level Emphasis (LRHGE) for input b) DWI (b-value=800 sec/mm2). Appendix III Figure 4.A, B, C & D: Illustrative examples of segmentation results of nine implemented methods. A) A representative patient (Male, 15years) with OS in right tibia; B) A representative patient (Male, 15years) with OS in right femur; C) A representative patient (Male, 17years) with OS in right humerus; D) A representative patient (Female, 16years) with OS in iliac bone. A, B, C & D. a) T2W fat-saturated image; b) DWI (b=800 sec/mm2); c) Ground-truth for tumor ROI (red outline) demarcated by radiologist; Segmentation results (blue outline) by d) Otsu- thresholding; e) Otsu-threshold-based region growing; f) Active contours; g) SLIC-Superpixels; h) Fuzzy c-means clustering; i) Graph cut; j) Logistic regression; k) Linear support-vector- machines; l) Deep feed-forward neural-network. Automated SLIC-Superpixels, Fuzzy c-means xxvi clustering and semi-automated Otsu-threshold-based region growing, Active contours methods produced qualitatively more accurate segmentation than other methods. Appendix III Figure 5.A, B & C: Illustrative examples of segmentation results of SLICs and FCM methods at baseline and 2nd follow-up for A) A representative patient (Male, 15years) with OS in right humerus having ground-truth RECIST1.1 score: Partial responder (PR); B) A representative patient (Male, 15years) with OS in left femur having ground-truth RECIST1.1 score: Stable disease (SD); C) A representative patient (Male, 18years) with OS in right shoulder having Ground-truth RECIST1.1 score: Progressive disease (PD). For A, B &C. a, e) axial DWI (b=800 sec/mm2) with maximum cross-sectional area of tumor burden; b, f) ground-truth for tumor ROI (red outline) demarcated by radiologist; c, g) SLIC- segmentation (green outline); d, h) FCM segmentation (yellow outline) at baseline and 2nd follow- up respectively. Appendix III Figure 6: Comparison of ground-truth Tumor-Diameters and ground-truth Tumor- Volume with automatically assessed measurements applying A. SLICs and B. FCM methods in patient cohort. For A, B a, b) Bland Altman plot showing agreement between ground-truth Tumor-diameter by observer-1 and automatically assessed tumor-diameter at baseline and 2nd follow-up respectively; c, d) Bland Altman plot showing agreement between ground-truth Tumor-diameter by observer-2 and automatically assessed tumor-diameter at baseline and 2nd follow-up respectively; e, f) Bland Altman plot showing agreement between ground-truth Tumor-volume and automatically assessed tumor-volume at baseline and 2nd follow-up respectively. xxvii LIST OF TABLES Table 1.1: MRI acquisition protocol. Table 2.1: Shows R2, relative parameter (Drel), RB and RRMSE values for BE, BEseg-2, BEseg- 1, BE+TV, and BE+HPF methods for Simulation-I at different noise levels. Table 2.2. Shows R2, relative parameter ( #$% ), RB and RRMSE values for BE, BEseg-2, BEseg-1, BE+TV, and BE+HPF methods for Simulation-II at different noise levels. Table 2.3. Shows R2, relative parameter (frel), RB and RRMSE values for BE, BEseg-2, BEseg-1, BE+TV, and BE+HPF methods for Simulation-III at different noise levels. Table 2.4: Shows R2, relative parameters (Drel), RB and RRMSE values for Diffusion Coefficient (D) for BE, BEseg-1, BEseg-2, BE+TV, and BE+HPF methods for Simulation-IV at different noise levels. Table 2.5: Shows R2, relative parameters ( #$% ), RB and RRMSE values for Perfusion Coefficient (D*) for BE, BEseg-1, BEseg-2, BE+TV, and BE+HPF methods for Simulation-IV at different noise levels. Table 2.6: Shows R2, relative parameters (frel), RB and RRMSE values for Perfusion Fraction (f) for BE, BEseg-1, BEseg-2, BE+TV, and BE+HPF methods for Simulation-IV at different noise levels. Table 2.7. Within-subject coefficient of Variation (wCV) calculated in tumor volume for empirical clinical data for all five methods. Table 2.8: Within-subject coefficient of variation (wCV) and between-subject coefficient of variation (bCV) of IVIM parameters diffusion coefficient (D), perfusion coefficient (D*) and perfusion fraction (f) in tumor volume evaluated by five IVIM analysis methodologies. Table 2.9: Within-subject coefficient of variation (wCV) and between-subject coefficient of variation (bCV) of IVIM parameters diffusion coefficient (D), perfusion coefficient (D*) and perfusion fraction (f) in healthy tissue volume evaluated by five IVIM analysis methodologies. xxviii Table 2.10: Average ADC, D, D* and f values in tumor volume evaluated by five IVIM analysis methods at three time-points. Table 2.11: Average ADC, D, D* and f values in healthy tissue volume evaluated by five IVIM analysis methods at three time-points. Table 2.12: Mean Std-Dev of D, D* and f parameter values in healthy tissue volume evaluated by BE+TV and BE+HPF IVIM analysis methods at time-points t0, t1 and t2 and their inter-scan comparison of mean parameter values, within-subject coefficient of variation (wCV) and Bland- Altman agreement across time-points. Table 3.1: Mean Std-Dev Apparent Diffusion Coefficient (ADC), Diffusion coefficient (D), Perfusion coefficient (D*), Perfusion fraction (f) and D*.f in healthy and tumor tissue ROI volume in patient cohort at time-point t0 (before commencement of chemotherapy). Estimated parameters in healthy and tumor tissue were significantly different (p<0.05). Table 3.2: Average Tumor-diameter (cm) and Tumor-volume (cc) measured among different response groups viz. Partial-response (PD), Stable-disease (SD) and Progressive-disease (PD) at three time-points t0, t1 and t2 in the course of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Table 3.3: Histogram parameters of Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), Diffusion-coefficient (D), Perfusion-coefficient (D*) & Perfusion-fraction (f) observed in different response groups: Partial-response (PR), Stable-disease (SD) and Progressive-disease (PD) at time points t0, t1 and t2 in the course of chemotherapy. Table 3.4: Statistically significant (p<0.05) parameters according to ANOVA test at three time- points t0, t1 & t2 and their respective Tukey post hoc test among response groups. Statistically significant (p<0.05) p-values are in bold . Table 3.5: Pearson-correlation-coefficient (r) of relative percentage changes in Tumor-diameter and Tumor-volume across different time points ( 1 & 2) with relative percentage changes of histogram parameters of diffusion and perfusion parameters ADC, D, D* and f among all patients. Table 3.6: Histogram parameters of Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), Diffusion-coefficient (D), Perfusion-coefficient (D*) & Perfusion-fraction (f) observed in different response groups: Responder (Res) and Non-responder (NRes) at time points t0 (before chemotherapy), t1 (after 1st xxix cycle of chemotherapy) and t2 (after completion of chemotherapy) and their relative percentage changes between time points t0 & t1 ( 1) and t0 & t2 ( 2). Statistically significant (p<0.05) values are in bold . Table 3.7: Statistically significant (p<0.05) histogram parameters of diffusion and perfusion parameters among Responder and Non-Responder groups at time-points t0 (before chemotherapy) and t1 (after 1st cycle of chemotherapy) and their ROC curve analysis. Table 4.1: Mean standard deviation of Jaccard-index (JI), Dice-coefficient (DC), Precision (P) and recall (R) for calculated Mask1 (tumor+edema), Mask2 (tumor), Mask (edema) and Mask (necrosis) in all patients for baseline and 2nd follow-up data after 3 cycles of Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT). Table 5.1: First-order statistical texture/ Histogram analysis features. Table 5.2: Texture features calculated by statistical texture analysis method GLCM. Table 5.3: Texture features calculated by statistical texture analysis method NGTDM. Table 5.4: Texture features calculated by statistical texture analysis method RLM. Table 5.5: List of different texture features calculated by statistical texture analysis methods: Gray Level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) (feature: f1-f9), Neighborhood gray-tone difference matrix (NGTDM) (feature: f10-f14) and Run length matrix (RLM) (feature: f15-f25). Table 5.6: Statistically significant (p<0.01) texture features for classifying healthy and tumor tissue using DWI800, T1W, T2W-nonfatsat and T2w-fatsat images. Texture features individually showing sensitivity and specificity of 90% for both with AUC 0.9 for classification among healthy and tumor tissue are in bold . In first bracket combined ROC analysis results for significant features are represented showing Sn: Sensitivity, Sp: Specificity, AUC: Area under curve. Table 5.7: Statistically significant (p<0.05) textural features for classification between Survivor and Non-survivor groups. Textural features individually showing AUC 0.75 for classification between two groups are in bold . In the first bracket combined ROC curve analysis results for significant features for each texture analysis method are presented showing Sn: Sensitivity, Sp: Specificity, AUC (CI): Area under curve (95% confidence interval). xxx Table 5.8: Selected textural features for identifying Responders and Non-responders to chemotherapy in all parametric maps and MR images. Textural features individually showing AUC 0.7 for classification between the two groups are in bold . Combined ROC analysis results for selected features for each texture analysis (TA) method are presented in the first bracket. Combined ROC analyses for selected features for all TA methods are presented in vertical columns. Sn: Sensitivity, Sp: Specificity, AUC (CI): Area under curve (95% confidence interval). Table 6.1: Textural feature(s) estimates for generalized linear regression model to predict tumor aggressiveness at baseline (t0) and responsiveness to chemotherapy in the course of chemotherapy (t0, t1 and t2). Appendix II Table 1: Mean Std-Dev values of textural features in tumor and healthy tissue volume evaluated in DWI (b=800 sec/mm2) at baseline. Statistically significant (p<0.01) features are in bold . Appendix II Table 2: Mean Std-Dev values of textural features in tumor and healthy tissue volume evaluated in T1-weighted MRI at baseline. Statistically significant (p<0.01) features are in bold . Appendix II Table 3: Mean Std-Dev values of textural features in tumor and healthy tissue volume evaluated in T2-weighted non-fat-saturated MRI at baseline. Statistically significant (p<0.01) features are in bold . Appendix II Table 4: Mean Std-Dev values of textural features in tumor and healthy tissue volume evaluated in T2-weighted fat-saturated MRI at baseline. Statistically significant (p<0.01) features are in bold . Appendix II Table 5: Area under the curve (AUC) analysis of statistically significant (p<0.01) textural features for predicting tumor aggressiveness leading to mortality at baseline (t0). CI: 95% confidence interval. Biomarkers with AUC 0.75 are in bold . Appendix II Table 6: Area under the curve (AUC) analysis of selected textural features for predicting Non-responders to chemotherapy at baseline (t0). CI: 95% confidence interval. Biomarkers with AUC 0.7 are in bold . Appendix III Table 1: Summary of nine segmentation algorithms implemented in this study. xxxi Appendix III Table 2: Mean Std-Dev Dice-Coefficient (DC), Jacquard-Index (JI), Precision (P), Recall (R), execution time, Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values and corresponding Pearson-correlation-coefficient (r) with Ground-truth ADC across patients with osteosarcoma for nine implemented methods (Tumor ADC for ground-truth mask: 1.3 0.33 x103 mm2/sec). ADC for ground-truth Tumor-volume at baseline: 1.3 0.33x103 mm2/sec and at 2nd follow-up: 1.72 0.27x103 mm2/sec. Appendix III Table 4: Total number of patients in four response group (CR, PR, SD & PD) according RECIST1.1 score and Volumetric response score determined by manual method and automated methods using SLICs and FCM. Appendix III Table 3: Tumor-diameter (cm), Tumor-volume (cc) and tumor ADC in patient cohort. Segmentation accuracy metrics Dice-Coefficient (DC), Jacquard-Index (JI), Precision (P), Recall (R) and Pearson-correlation-coefficient (r) of measured parameters with ground-truth measurements across patients and overall execution time (second)/patient for SLICs and FCM methods. Values are showing Mean Std-Dev in patient cohort. Ground-truth Tumor-diameter at baseline: 9.72 2.88cm; 10.27 3.17 and at 2nd follow-up: 8.51 3.03cm; 8.85 3.38cm for observer-1 and observer-2 respectively; Ground-truth Tumor-volume at baseline: 514.26 504.57cc and at 2nd follow-up: 435.97 413.29cc; xxxii GLOSSARY Abbreviation Full form / Meaning 1D One-dimensional 3D Three-dimensional AC Active contour ACC average correlation coefficients ADC Apparent diffusion coefficient AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences AUC Area under curve bCV Between-subject coefficient of variation BE Bi-exponential BEseg-2 Segmented BE method with 2-parameter fitting BEseg-1 Segmented BE method with 1-parameter fitting BE+TV BE model with Total Variation Penalty function BE+HPF BE model with Huber Penalty function BF Blood flow BV Blood volume b-value Diffusion weighting factor CAD Computer aided diagnostic CBV Cerebral blood volume CR Complete-response CT Computed tomography D Diffusion coefficient D* Perfusion coefficient DC Dice-coefficient DCE Dynamic contrast enhanced Drel Relative diffusion coefficient #$% Relative perfusion coefficient DNN Deep feed-forward neural-network DSC Dynamic susceptibility contrast-enhanced DW Diffusion weighted xxxiii DWI Diffusion weighted imaging DWI800 DWI with b-value=800sec/mm2 1 Relative percentage changes between t0 t1 2 Relative percentage changes between t0 t2 ESFT Ewing s sarcoma f Perfusion fraction FCM Fuzzy c-means clustering FDG Fluorodeoxyglucose frel Relative Perfusion fraction GC Energy-based graph cut GLCM Gray-level co-occurrence matrix GLN Gray-Level Nonuniformity GLRM Generalized linear regression model GMs Gradient magnitudes GTSDM Gray-tone spatial dependence matrices HCC Hepatocellular carcinoma HGRE High Gray-Level Run Emphasis HNSCC Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma HPE Histopathological evaluation HPF Huber penalty function IVIM Intravoxel Incoherent Motion JI Jacquard-index KS test Nonparametric two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test LARC locally advanced rectal cancer LGRE Low Gray-Level Run Emphasis LM Levenberg-marquardt LR Logistic regression LRE Long Run Emphasis LRHGE Long Run High Gray-Level Emphasis LRLGE Long Run Low Gray-Level Emphasis L-SVM Linear support-vector-machines Mth Otsu multi-thresholding MR Magnetic resonance MRI Magnetic resonance imaging xxxiv ME Mono-exponential MER Misclassification error rate MTT Mean transit time MWW Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon NACT Neoadjuvant chemotherapy NHTDM Neighborhood gray-tone difference matrix NLLS Non-linear least-squares NRes Non-responder OS Osteosarcoma OT Otsu-thresholding OT-RG Otsu-threshold-based region growing P Precision PH Horizontal PLD Left-diagonal PRD Right-diagonal PV Vertical PD Progressive-disease PET Positron emission tomography PGSE Pulsed Gradient Spin Echo POE classification error probability PR Partial response PWI Perfusion weighted imaging r Pearson-correlation-coefficient R Recall R2 Coefficient-of-determination RB Relative bias RF Radio frequency ROI Region of interest RECIST Response evaluation criteria in solid tumors Res Responder RLM Run length matrix RLN Run Length Nonuniformity ROC Receiver-operating-characteristic-curve RP Run Percentage xxxv RPC Relative percentage change RRMSE Relative root mean-square error Sb Diffusion weighted signal/image at diffusion weighting factor value b sec/mm2 SD Stable disease SLICs Simple linear iterative clustering supervoxels SLICs+MTh Simple linear iterative clustering supervoxel and Otsu multi- thresholding Sn Sensitivity SNR Signal to Noise Ratio SNRs0 SNR in diffusion weighted image S0 Sp Specificity SRE Short Run Emphasis SRHGE Short Run High Gray-Level Emphasis SRLGE Short Run Low Gray-Level Emphasis Std-Dev Standard deviation SUV Standardized uptake value t0 Baseline (before chemotherapy) t1 1st follow-up (after 1st cycle of chemotherapy) t2 2nd follow-up (after 3rd cycle of chemotherapy) T1W T1 Weighted T2W T2 Weighted T2W-fatsat T2-weighted fat-saturated T2W-nonfatsat T2-weighted non-fat-saturated TA Texture analysis TE Time of echo Th Threshold TR Repetition time TV Total variation VOI Volume of interest wCV Within-subject coefficient of variation