3870 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005 Antenna Design for UHF RFID Tags: A Review and a Practical Application K. V. Seshagiri Rao, Senior Member, IEEE, Pavel V. Nikitin, Member, IEEE, and Sander F. Lam Abstract In this paper, an overview of antenna design for pas- sive radio frequency identi cation (RFID) tags is presented. We discuss various requirements of such designs, outline a generic de- sign process including range measurement techniques and concen- trate on one practical application: RFID tag for box tracking in warehouses. A loaded meander antenna design for this application is described and its various practical aspects such as sensitivity to fabrication process and box content are analyzed. Modeling and simulation results are also presented which are in good agreement with measurement data. Index Terms Antennas, passive modulated backscatter, radio frequency identi cation (RFID), tags, transponders. I. INTRODUCTION R ADIO FREQUENCY identi cation (RFID) is a rapidly developing technology which uses RF signals for auto- matic identi cation of objects. Although the rst paper on mod- ulated backscatter (basic principle of passive RFID) was pub- lished in 1948 [1] it took considerable amount of time before the technology advanced to current level [2]. Now RFID nds many applications in various areas such as electronic toll collec- tion, asset identi cation, retail item management, access con- trol, animal tracking, and vehicle security [3]. Several standards of RFID systems are currently in use (ISO, Class 0, Class 1, and Gen 2). Globally, each country has its own frequency allocation for RFID. For example, RFID UHF bands are: 866 869 MHz in Europe, 902 928 MHz in North and South America, and 950 956 MHz in Japan and some Asian countries. A typical passive RFID transponder often called tag consists of an an- tenna and an application speci c integrated circuit (ASIC) chip. RFID tags can be active (with batteries) or passive (batteryless). A passive back-scattered RFID system operates in the fol- lowing way. A base station (reader) transmits a modulated signal with periods of unmodulated carrier, which is received by the tag antenna. The RF voltage developed on antenna terminals during unmodulated period is converted to dc. This voltage powers up the chip, which sends back the information by varying its front end complex RF input impedance. The impedance typically tog- gles between two different states, between conjugate match and some other impedance, effectively modulating the back-scat- tered signal. Fig. 1 illustrates a passive RFID system operation. Manuscript received December 18, 2004; revised June 8, 2005. The authors are with the RFID Intellitag Engineering Department, Intermec Technologies Corporation, Everett, WA 98203 USA (e-mail: kvs.rao@in- termec.com; pavel.nikitin@intermec.com; sander.lam@intermec.com). Digital Object Identi er 10.1109/TAP.2005.859919 Proper impedance match between the antenna and the chip is of paramount importance in RFID. Since new IC design and manufacturing is a big and costly venture, RFID tag antennas are designed for a speci c ASIC available in the market. Adding an external matching network with lumped elements is usually prohibitive in RFID tags due to cost and fabrication issues. To overcome this situation, antenna can be directly matched to the ASIC which has complex impedance varying with the frequency and the input power applied to the chip. Several papers have been published on RFID antennas for both passive and active tags, including covered slot antenna design [4], circular patch antenna analysis [5], meander antenna optimization [6], planar inverted F-antenna [7], folded dipole antenna [8], etc. However, very few papers [9] provided an overview of criteria for RFID tag antenna design and an anal- ysis of practical application aspects. At the same time, there exist many papers on practical analysis and design of particular classes of antennas used for other applications [10] [12]. In the current article, we attempted to ll the existing gap. We reviewed design requirements for passive UHF RFID tag antennas, outlined the design process, described range measure- ment techniques, and proposed a performance chart for tag anal- ysis. We also presented a speci c application example: a passive UHF tag design for a RFID tag placed on a cardboard box that is being tracked in standard supply chain. The design is a versa- tile loaded meander antenna which can be easily tuned for boxes with various content like dry goods or plastics. This example is supplemented with modeling and simulation results which are in close agreement with measured data. II. ANTENNA DESIGN A. Performance Criteria The most important tag performance characteristic is read range the maximum distance at which RFID reader can de- tect the backscattered signal from the tag. Because reader sensi- tivity is typically high in comparison with tag, the read range is de ned by the tag response threshold. Read range is also sensi- tive to the tag orientation, the material the tag is placed on, and to the propagation environment. The read range can be calculated using Friis free-space for- mula as (1) where is the wavelength, is the power transmitted by the reader, is the gain of the transmitting antenna, is the gain of the receiving tag antenna, is the minimum threshold 0018-926X/$20.00 2005 IEEE RAO et al.: ANTENNA DESIGN FOR UHF RFID TAGS: A REVIEW 3871 Fig. 1. RFID system operation. The backscattered signal is modulated by changes in chip impedance Z . Fig. 2. Antenna impedance, chip impedance, and range as functions of frequency for a typical RFID tag. power necessary to provide enough power to the RFID tag chip, and is the power transmission coef cient given by (2) where is chip impedance and is antenna impedance. Qualitative behavior of antenna impedance, chip impedance, and read range as functions of frequency for a typical RFID tag is illustrated in Fig. 2. The frequency of the peak range is re- ferred as the tag resonance. The tag range bandwidth can be de ned as the frequency band in which the tag offers an accept- able minimum read range over that band. From (1) one can see that read range is determined by the product of the reader (transmitter EIRP), tag antenna gain , and transmission coef- cient . Typically is dominant in frequency dependence and primarily determines the tag resonance which happens at the fre- quency of the best impedance match between chip and antenna. This frequency is different from the resonant frequency of an- tenna loaded with 50 Ohm and the antenna self-resonance. The range in (1) can be normalized with a factor 4 . This factor is the range of the tag with 0 dBi antenna perfectly matched to the chip impedance at a xed frequency. Contours of constant range from (1) can be plotted on gain-transmission coef cient plane as shown in Fig. 3 where they are labeled with their values normalized to . The chart in Fig. 3 can be used as a common reference frame to present the performance of any RFID tag antenna similar to impedance presentation of a circuit Fig. 3. Tag antenna performance chart: contours of constant normalized range in gain-transmission coef cient plane where the range multiplier is r = (=4) P G =P . Peak free-space performance of RFID tag in example given in this article is also shown. on a Smith chart. The same range can correspond to several gain-transmission coef cient combinations. The RFID tag antenna design process involves inevitable tradeoffs between antenna gain, impedance, and bandwidth. The performance chart in Fig. 3 helps the designer to estimate the range tradeoff between the impedance matching and the gain. The normalization factor for this performance chart can be easily calculated for any case of EIRP and threshold power of the chip for a given frequency. 3872 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005 B. Design Requirements Several general RFID tag design requirements whose rela- tive importance depends on tag application are discussed in the following paragraph. These requirements largely determine the criteria for selecting an RFID tag antenna. 1) Frequency band. Desired frequency band of operation depends on the regulations of the country where tag will be used. 2) Size and form. Tag form and size must be such that it can be embedded or attached to the required objects (cardboard boxes, airline baggage strips, identi cation cards, etc.) or t inside a printed label. 3) Read range. Minimum required read range is usually speci ed for different: EIRP. EIRP is determined by local country regu- lations. Objects. Tag performance changes when it is placed on different objects (e.g. cardboard boxes with various content), or when other objects are present in the vicinity of the tagged object. Tag an- tenna can be designed or tuned for optimum perfor- mance on a particular object or designed to be less sensitive to the content on which the tag is placed. Orientation. Read range depends on antenna ori- entation. Some applications require a tag to have a speci c directivity pattern such as omnidirectional or hemispherical coverage. 4) Applications with mobility. RFID tag may be used in situations where tagged objects like pallets or boxes travel on a conveyor belt at speeds up to either 600 ft/min or 10 mph. The Doppler shift in this case is less than 30 Hz at 915 MHz and does not affect RFID oper- ation. However, the tag spends less time in the read eld of RFID reader, demanding high read rate capability. In such cases, RFID system must be carefully planned to ensure reliable tag identi cation. 5) Cost. RFID tag must be a low-cost device. This im- poses restrictions both on antenna structure and on the choice of materials for its construction including the ASIC used. Typical conductors used in tags are copper, aluminum, and silver ink. The dielectrics include a ex- ible polyester and rigid PCB substrates like FR4. 6) Reliability. RFID tag must be a reliable device that can sustain variations due to temperature, humidity, stress, and survive such processes as label insertion, printing and lamination. C. Design Process RFID tag antenna performance strongly depends on the fre- quency-dependent complex impedance presented by the chip. Tag read range must be closely monitored in the design process in order to satisfy design requirements. Since antenna size and frequency of operation impose limitations on maximum attainable gain and bandwidth [13], [14] compromises have to be made to obtain optimum tag performance to satisfy design requirements. Often a tunable antenna design is preferable to provide tolerance for tag fabrication variations and for opti- mizing antenna performance on different materials in different frequency bands. Fig. 4. RFID tag antenna design process. RFID tag antenna design process is illustrated on a ow chart shown in Fig. 4. Once the RFID application is selected, system requirements can be translated into tag requirements. These re- quirements determine the materials for tag antenna construction and ASIC packaging. The impedance of the selected ASIC in a chosen RF package (like ip-chip, etc.) to which antenna will be matched can be measured with a network analyzer. Antenna parametric study and optimization is performed until design requirements are met in simulation. Like most antennas, RFID tag antennas tend to be too complicated for analytical solution as they can be used in complex environment. Tag antennas are usually analyzed with electromagnetic mod- eling and simulation tools, typically with method of moments (MoM) for planar designs (e.g. thin exible tags) and with nite-element method (FEM) or nite-difference time-domain method (FDTD) for more complicated three-dimensional de- signs (e.g. thick metal mounted tags). Fast EM analysis tools are crucial for ef cient tag design. In a typical design process, modeling and simulation tools can be benchmarked against measurements. Read range calculation can be implemented di- rectly in EM software. Tag antenna is rst modeled, simulated, and optimized on a computer by monitoring the tag range, antenna gain, and impedance which give to a designer a good understanding of the antenna behavior. In the last step of the design process, prototypes are built and theirperformanceismeasuredextensively.Ifdesignrequirements are satis ed, the antenna design is ready. Otherwise, the design is further modi ed and optimized until requirements are met. D. Range Measurement Accurate tag range measurement can be conducted in a con- trolled environment, such as anechoic chamber or transverse electromagnetic (TEM) cell. In both methods tag position can be xed and transmitter output power can be varied by controlled RAO et al.: ANTENNA DESIGN FOR UHF RFID TAGS: A REVIEW 3873 Fig. 5. RFID tag range measurement using anechoic chamber. Fig. 6. RFID tag range measurement using TEM cell. attenuation. This allows one to carry accurate tag range char- acterization and avoid using large and prohibitively expensive chambers or cells. Compact TEM cell is a convenient tool for measuring small tags while larger anechoic chamber can be used to measure tag performance on various objects. In anechoic chamber, the tag is placed at a xed distance from the reader antenna as illustrated in Fig. 5. At each frequency, the minimum power required to communicate with the tag is recorded. Since the loss of the connecting cable, the gain of the transmitting antenna and the distance to the tag are known, the tag range for any transmitter EIRP of interest can be determined from (1) as (3) The general guidelines for selecting the tag position in ane- choic chamber are the following: i) the distance must be such that the tag will respond and will be in far eld and ii) the tag must be placed in a quiet zone of the anechoic chamber where multipath is minimal. In TEM cell, the tag is placed inside, and the cell is con- nected to RFID reader with variable output power as illustrated in Fig. 6. At each frequency, the minimum power at the input of TEM cell required to communicate with the tag is measured. Tag range can be calculated from known expressions for the eld inside TEM cell [15] as (4) Fig. 7. RFID conveyor belt application. Boxes are equipped with smart labels and being tracked. where is the height of the TEM cell at the cross-section where RFID tag is placed and is TEM cell input impedance. In our measurements, we used an anechoic chamber with 3 ft (0.91 m) distance to the tag and 6.2 dBi linearly polarized reader antenna. The TEM cell had parameters 220 mm and 50 Ohm. Cable loss was 0.5 dB in both cases. III. RFID EXAMPLE A. Application Consider a speci c application: a smart label for cardboard box labeling in warehouse environment worldwide. Such a label with a bar code printed on it and an RFID tag embedded under- neath can be placed on cardboard boxes with various contents. Boxes may travel on a conveyor belt as shown in Fig. 7 or may be moved through large portals by forklifts equipped with RFID readers. Requirements to the tag design are the following: Tag should be easily tunable to any frequency in 860 960 MHz range for various contents in the nal assembly when the tag is inserted into a label and placed on a cardboard box. Tag should have at least 2.5 m range with 4 W EIRP in 915 MHz band (902 928 MHz frequencies, US) and at least 2.2 m range with 2 W ERP (3.3 W EIRP) in 868 MHz band (866 869 MHz frequencies, Europe) to meet worst case application requirements. Tag should t into a standard 6 4 inch label. It is desirable to have as small footprint as possible to t into 4 2 inch and 4 1 inch labels for other potential applications. It is preferred to have omni-like read range perfor- mance for a tag. B. Antenna Design The process of antenna design is brie y described below. Materials. Because of cost and application considera- tions, it was decided to use for the antenna a thin ex- ible polyester substrate with a dielectric permittivity of 3.5 and a thickness of 2 mil (0.051 mm). Top antenna trace was made of copper and had a thickness of 0.7 mil (0.018 mm). 3874 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005 TABLE I PARAMETERS OF THE LOADED MEANDER TAG ANTENNA (mm) Fig. 8. RFID chip af xed to antenna terminals using ip-chip packaging. Fig. 9. Geometry of the loaded meander tag antenna. ASIC. For this smart label application, we used Philips EPC 1.19 G2 RFID ASIC chip [16] mounted on an- tenna terminals as shown in Fig. 8 using ip-chip pack- aging [17] which has been widely established as a pop- ular low-cost technique. The input impedance of the packaged chip was mea- sured in the frequency domain with the network ana- lyzer for different power levels. It was determined with RFID reader that the minimum power needed by the chip to turn on is 10 dBm, which agreed with manu- facturer speci cations. Antenna type. The antenna geometry is shown in Fig. 9. Because of the size and tunability require- ments, meandered dipole antenna was a natural choice. Meandering allowed the antenna to be compact and to provide omnidirectional performance in the plane perpendicular to the axis of the meander. To have a better control over the antenna resistance, we added one loading bar with the same width as the meander trace. To provide a better match for the chip capacitive impedance, one meandered section was further me- andered to obtain additional inductance. This antenna can be easily tuned by trimming. Lengths of meander trace and loading bar can be varied to obtain optimum reactance and resistance matching. The trimming is realized by punching holes through the antenna trace at de ned locations. Such tunable design is desirable where it is often needed to provide a solution for a particular application with a minimum lead time. Parametric study and optimization. The loaded me- ander antenna has several key parameters: loading bar width , distance , spacing , meander step width , and meander step height . Maximum allowed antenna length is dictated by the size requirements. The pa- Fig. 10. Impedance of the loaded meander tag antenna (R , X ) as a function of meander trace length trimming x. Tag resonance is determined by the best match with the chip impedance (R , X ). rameters mentioned above in uence antenna gain and impedance which determine tag resonance, peak range, and bandwidth. This thin planar antenna was optimized using Ansoft Designer. Tag range was computed from (1) using simulated values for gain and impedance and measured values for chip impedance at the threshold power. Although Ansoft software had a pow- erful parametrics and optimization engine, its post-pro- cessing capabilities were not suf cient to create an ad- equate cost function for our design requirements. The optimal realizable combinations of tag antenna param- eterswereidenti edbyplottingandexaminingthefam- iliesofcurves.Afteroptimization,wearrivedtothe nal parameter values for tag antenna given in Table I. Antenna reactance and resistance can be controlled by trimming as it is illustrated in Fig. 10. For example, trimming the meander trace by mm moves the resonant frequency up by 20 MHz. The gain is not signi cantly affected by trimming as it is shown in Fig. 11. The performance of the untrimmed tag is also shown on the chart in Fig. 3. Prototyping and validation. Several tag prototypes similar to the one shown in Fig. 12 were fabricated and tested in both anechoic chamber and TEM cell range measurement setups. Fig. 13 presents a comparison between theoretical and experimentally measured read range for one of the tags tuned to 915 MHz band in free space. It can be seen that theoretical curve and experimental data are in close agreement. Differences between TEM cell data and anechoic chamber data are due partially to imper- fections of anechoic chamber and partially to electric eld nonuniformities inside TEM cell. RAO et al.: ANTENNA DESIGN FOR UHF RFID TAGS: A REVIEW 3875 Fig. 11. Gain of the loaded meander tag antenna in yz-plane at 900 MHz as a function of meander trace length trimming x. Fig. 12. Prototype of RFID tag with loaded meander antenna. Fig. 13. Theoretical and experimental read ranges for loaded meander RFID tag in free-space (EIRP = 4 W). Sensitivity to chip variations. Tag design must meet range requirements in spite of variations in ASIC as- sembly and packaging process. Because all fabrica- tion details may not be known in advance, the tag res- onant frequency after fabrication may differ signi - cantly from the expected value. To provide suf cient tolerance for tag resonant fre- quency, our meander antenna is designed to resonate in free-space with a typical chip impedance shown in Fig. 14. Variations of RFID tag range versus frequency for different samples due to ASIC packaging process variations (ERP = 2 W). Fig. 15. Variations of RFID tag range versus frequency for different tagged objects (ERP = 2 W). Box 1 is empty cardboard box and box 2 is cardboard box with plastic material ( = 2.87) inside. Fig. 10 at about 855 MHz. This ensures that when the tag is placed on the box, it covers the lowest RFID band (866 869 MHz) even if fabrication process causes sig- ni cant resonant frequency deviation. The tag antenna can always be trimmed to a shorter length whereas ex- tending its length after the fabrication is not easy. After the prototypes were fabricated, it was found that the spread of the tag resonant frequency is about 20 MHz as shown in Fig. 14. This spread was caused by the ip-chip attachment process which affected the package parasitics and added variations to the imagi- nary part of the packaged chip impedance. Sensitivity to box content. When the tag is placed on a cardboard box with some content, its resonance frequency shifts down but the tag can be trimmed and tuned to the proper frequency and range performance as shown in Fig. 15. The corresponding trimming of the meander trace and the loading bar is shown in Fig. 16. 3876 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 53, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2005 Fig. 16. Meander tuning for various box content in 868 MHz band. Once the tuning is determined, it can be applied to all tags destined to work for speci c box content in spe- ci c frequency band. The presented tag design meets the desired range requirements for various box con- tents in both 868 MHz and 915 MHz frequency bands. IV. CONCLUSION Radio frequency identi cation is a rapidly developing tech- nology for automatic identi cation of objects. In this paper, we presented an overview of antenna design for passive UHF RFID tags. We discussed various requirements to such designs, out- lined a generic design process including range measurement techniques, and concentrated on one practical application, RFID tag for box tracking in warehouse. We presented a loaded me- ander antenna design for this application and analyzed various practical aspects such as its sensitivity to fabrication process and box content. We also presented modeling and simulation results which were in good agreement with measurement data. The analysis presented here can also be applied to active tags and tags operating at other frequencies. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank their colleagues Mr. T. Miller and Dr. P. Maltseff, both of the Intermec Technologies Corpo- ration, Everett, WA, for their interest in this work. REFERENCES [1] H. Stockman, Communication by means of re ected power, Proc. IRE, pp. 1196 1204, Oct. 1948. [2] K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook: Radio-Frequency Identi cation Fun- damentals and Applications, 2nd ed: Wiley, 2004. [3] R. Bansal, Coming soon to a Wal-Mart near you, IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., vol. 45, pp. 105 106, Dec. 2003. [4] S.-Y. Chen and P. Hsu, CPW-fed folded-slot antenna for 5.8 GHz RFID tags, Electron. Lett., vol. 24, pp. 1516 1517, Nov. 2004. [5] S. K. Padhi, N. C. Karmakar, C. L. Law, and S. Aditya, A dual polarized aperture coupled circular patch antenna using a C-shaped coupling slot, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 3295 3298, Dec. 2003. [6] G. Marrocco, Gain-optimized self-resonant meander line antennas for RFID applications, Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 2, no. 21, pp. 302 305, 2003. [7] M. Hirvonen, P. Pursula, K. Jaakkola, and K. Laukkanen, Planar in- verted-F antenna for radio frequency identication, Electron. Lett., vol. 40, pp. 848 850, Jul. 2004. [8] Q. Xianming and Y. Ning, A folded dipole antenna for RFID, in Proc. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Soc. Int. Symp., vol. 1, Jun. 2004, pp. 97 100. [9] P. R. Foster and R. A. Burberry, Antenna problems in RFID systems, in Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng. Colloquium RFID Technology, Oct. 1999, pp. 3/1 3/5. [10] C. Peixeiro, Design of log-periodic dipole antennas, Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng. Microwaves, Antennas and Propagation, vol. 135, pp. 98 102, Apr. 1988. [11] S. Weigand, G. H. Hu, K. H. Pan, and J. T. Bernhard, Analysis and design of broad-band single-layer rectangular U-slot microstrip patch antennas, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 457 468, Mar. 2003. [12] S. Brebels, J. Ryckaert, B. Come, S. Donnay, W. D. Raedt, E. Beyne, and R. P. Mertens, SOP integration and codesign of antennas, IEEE Trans. Adv. Packag., vol. 27, pp. 341 351, May 2004. [13] R. F. Harrington, Effect of antenna size on gain, bandwidth, and eciency, J. Res. Nat. Bureau Standards, vol. 64D, pp. 1 12, Jan.-Feb. 1960. [14] H. A. Wheeler, Small antennas, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. AP-23, no. 4, pp. 462 469, Jul. 1975. [15] P. Hui, Small antenna measurements using a GTEM cell, in Proc. IEEE Antennas and Propagation Soc. Int. Symp., vol. 1, Jun. 2003, pp. 715 718. [16] http://www.semiconductors.philips.com. [17] R. Tummala and E. Rymaszewski, Microelectronics Packaging Hand- book. New York: Van Nostrand Reinold, 1989. K. V. Seshagiri Rao (S 78 M 84 SM 91) received the Ph.D. degree from the Indian Institute of Tech- nology (IIT), Kharagpur, India, in 1984. In 1979, he joined the IIT, as a Senior Research As- sistant, and subsequently joined the faculty in 1984. Apart from his teaching at IIT, he has also partici- pated in various projects in the area of antennas and circuits sponsored by defense and aerospace. In 1988, he was on sabbatical leave from IIT as a Research As- sociate with the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. In 1993, he joined Antenna Research Asso- ciates, Beltsville, MD, where he was involved with the design and development of antennas. He then joined the T. J. Watson Research Center, IBM, Yorktown Heights, NY, as a Research Staff Member, where he was involved with RFID. In 1998, he joined the Intermec Technologies Corporation, Everett, WA, as one of the core team members with the RFID technologies acquired from IBM. He is currently a Staff Technologist with the RFID Intellitag Engineering Depart- ment, Intermec Technologies Corporation, where he also manages a small group in the area of RFID transponder design and development. He coauthored Mil- limeter-Wave Microstrip and Printed Circuit Antennas (Norwood, MA: Artech House, 1991). He has authored or coauthored approximately 35 technical pub- lications in standard journals and conferences. He also has 13 U.S. patents in the area of RFID. Pavel V. Nikitin (S 98 M 02) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Utah State University, Logan, in 1994 and 1998, respec- tively, the B.S. degree in physics from Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russia, in 1995, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, in 2002. In Summer 1999, he was a Software Design En- gineer with Ansoft Corporation, Pittsburgh, PA. In Summer 2000, he was a Design Development En- gineer with the Microelectronics Division, IBM Corporation, Essex Junction, VT. In 2002, he joined the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, as a Research Associate, where he was involved with com- puter- aided design of mixed-technology systems-on-chip. In 2004, he joined the Intermec Technologies Corporation, Everett, WA, where he is currently a Lead Engineer with the RFID Intellitag Engineering Department involved with the design and development of antennas for RFID tags. He has authored over 40 technical publications. He also has several patents pending. Dr. Nikitin was the recipient of the ECE Teaching Assistant of the Year Award presented by Carnegie-Mellon University. Sander F. Lam received the B.Eng. degree from Mc- Master University, Hamilton, ON, Canada, in 1981. Since 1982, he has been involved with various RF communication hardware design. He was involved in the research and development of single-conversion TVRO and CATV headend equipment with Triple Crown Electronics Inc., Mississauga, ON, Canada. In 1989, he joined U.S.-based Auget Communi- cation Products Inc., where he was the lead RF Designer involved with CATV two-way broad-band trunk distribution ampli ers. In 1997, he joined the Intermec Technologies Corporation, Everett, WA, where he is currently the Senior RF Engineer. His interests include various RF communication hardware design and RFID tag development. 1906 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2006 Comments and Replies Comments on Antenna Design for UHF RFID Tags: A Review and a Practical Application Yuri Tikhov In [1], the authors discuss the generic design process for passive UHF Radio Frequency IDenti cation (RFID) tag antennas. The attempt to formulate the key universal criteria for the tag antenna design looks really interesting. In this connection the most important characteristic of every UHF RFID system is a read range r the maximum practical distance between an interrogator base station (reader) and a transponder (tag). Accordingly, the basic considerations are focused on the read range formula given in [1] as (1) r =  4 PtGtGr Pth (1) where  is the wavelength, Pt is the power transmitted by the reader, Gt is the gain of the reader antenna, Gr is the gain of tag antenna, Pth is the minimum threshold power necessary to provide enough energy feeding for the tag chip, and is the power transmission coef cient due to the impedance mismatch between tag antenna and chip. Indeed, the far- eld formula (1) is correct subject to assumption that polariza- tion of reader antenna and the polarization of tag antenna are perfectly matched. But in fact, the polarization mismatch is essential in most RFID applications. The point is that in the majority of applications the tag is allowed to appear in almost arbitrary position in the eld of the reader antenna. Actually in [1] authors mention the problem of tag orientation, but just in the speci c context of a directivity pattern. However, the polariza- tion issue becomes also critical. And the polarization of the tag antenna is usually linear because of pre-required small size of the tag. In such situation the only way to ful ll a system requirement is to use circu- larly polarized reader antenna. Thus, a sacri ce of 3-dB power loss due to polarization mismatch between circularly polarized reader antenna and linearly polarized tag antenna overcomes the problem of tag ori- entation. This is why nowadays the major vendors (such as [2] [5] and many others) offer mainly circularly polarized reader antennas. At the same time the linearly polarized antennas are also available in the market for limited RFID applications. In the case of linearly po- larized both reader and tag antennas, the substantial polarization mis- alignment may cause severe power loss which in its turn can potentially lead even to fault of RFID system at all. Therefore, considering polarization issues, in order to avoid overes- timation of the read range the formula (1) needs revisions. De nitely, in the most conventional case of circular-to-linear polarization mis- match the read range r should be (1= p 2) times shorter. In the case of linear-to-linear polarization mismatch the decay factor is a function of the variable misalignment angle. The chart in [1, Fig. 3] should be corrected accordingly. Manuscript received December 10, 2005. The author is with the Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Suwon 440-600, Korea (e-mail: tikhov@sait.samsung.co.kr). Digital Object Identi er 10.1109/TAP.2006.875933 Besides, it is worth mentioning that formula (1) is invalid at near- eld distances between reader and tag. And the near- eld situation can frequently happen in practical UHF RFID application scenario. Regardless of above-mentioned inaccuracy, the qualitative value of the work [1] can be de nitely very helpful for designers of passive UHF RFID tags. REFERENCES [1] K. V. S. Rao, P. V. Nikitin, and S. F. Lam, Antenna design for UHF RFID tags: A review and a practical application, IEEE Trans. An- tennas Propag., vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 3870 3876, Dec. 2005. [2] Symbol Technologies, Inc.. Holtsville, NY 11742-1300 [Online]. Available: www.symbol.com [3] SAMSys Technologies, Inc.. Ontario, Canada [Online]. Available: www.samsys.com [4] Applied Wireless Identi cations Group, Inc.. Monsey, NY [Online]. Available: www.awid.com [5] Intermec Technologies Corp.. West Everett, WA [Online]. Available: www.intermec.com Reply to Comments on Antenna Design for UHF RFID Tags: A Review and a Practical Application Pavel V. Nikitin and K. V. S. Rao The rst issue raised by Dr. Tikhov in his Comments [1] is missing polarization mismatch factor in (1) of our work [2]. We agree that po- larization mismatch is an important factor in communication links [3]. We also would like to point that (1) gives the maximum distance in free space at which RFID reader can detect the backscattered signal from a given tag which implies that both reader antenna and tag antenna are oriented towards each other in the direction of maximum gain and their polarizations are matched. To make (1) more general, one can indeed include in it both the polarization ef ciency p (which accounts for po- larization mismatch) and the dependence of antenna gain on the angles (; '). The modi ed read range equation would then be given by r =  4 PtGt(; ')Gr(; ')p Pth : (1) In the most general case, both reader and tag antenna are elliptically polarized with mutually tilted major axis of the polarization ellipses which lie in the planes perpendicular to the direction of propagation. The polarization ef ciency p can be expressed as [4] p = 1 + 2 12 2 + 212 cos(#1   #2) (1 + 2 1) (1 + 2 2) (2) Manuscript received February 19, 2006. The authors are with the RFID Intellitag Engineering Department, Intermec Technologies Corporation, Everett, WA 98203 USA (e-mail: pavel.nikitin@in- termec.com; kvs.rao@intermec.com). Digital Object Identi er 10.1109/TAP.2006.875934 0018-926X/$20.00 2006 IEEE IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2006 1907 where 1ej# and 2ej# are the complex polarization ratios of the reader antenna and the tag antenna. The absolute value  of the antenna polarization ratio is related to the antenna axial ratio A (measured in decibels) as A = 20 log  + 1    1 : (3) There are several special cases of interest for RFID applications. When both antennas are linearly polarized and oriented with a misalignment angle , the polarization ef ciency is p = cos2 . When the reader antenna is circularly polarized and the tag antenna is linearly polarized, the polarization ef ciency is 1=2 which decreases the read range by p 2 as correctly pointed out by Dr. Tikhov. Dr. Tikhov also mentions that (1) is invalid at near- eld distances. We agree with that but would like to emphasize again that (1) gives the maximum distance at which RFID reader can read the tag in free space. In most UHF RFID systems, this distance extends well into the far- eld zone. This is re ected in the very form of (1) which uses Friis free-space transmission formula valid only in the far- eld region [5]. While some tag application scenarios involve near- eld tag scanning, it can be expected that in most cases the tag which can operate in the far eld should receive more than adequate power to operate when brought closer to RFID reader antenna into the near eld. Hence, the read range of most UHF RFID tags is determined by the tag performance in far eld. We would like to thank Dr. Tikhov for his valuable Comments [1] which helped to clarify some aspects of our work [2] and make it more useful for tag antenna designers and other RFID community. REFERENCES [1] Y. Tikhov, Comments on Antenna design for UHF RFID tags: A re- view and a practical application , IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 54, p. 1906, Jun. 2006. [2] K. V. S. Rao, P. V. Nikitin, and S. Lam, Antenna design for UHF RFID tags: A review and a practical application, IEEE Trans. An- tennas Propag., vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 3870 3876, Dec. 2005. [3] P. Talaga, The measurement of a large antenna using a spacecraft as a receiver, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 883 888, Jun. 1990. [4] IEEE Standard Test Procedures for Antennas, , Dec. 1979, IEEE Stan- dard 149-1979, pp. 61 70. [5] D. C. Hogg, Fun with the Friis free-space transmission formula, IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 33 35, Aug. 1993.