See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/276225509 Robust Consensus: A New Measure for Multicriteria Robust Group Decision Making Problems Using Evolutionary Approach Conference Paper June 2014 DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-07173-2_33 CITATIONS 5 READS 150 3 authors: Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Generalization of ANN View project Finding Robust Solutions with Consensus in Multi-Objective Optimization View project Kaustuv Nag Indian Institute of Information Technology Guwahati 18 PUBLICATIONS 248 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Tandra Pal National Institute of Technology, Durgapur 64 PUBLICATIONS 1,070 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Nikhil Pal Indian Statistical Institute 362 PUBLICATIONS 21,026 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Kaustuv Nag on 13 May 2015. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. Robust Consensus: A new Measure for Multicriteria Robust Group Decision Making Problems using Evolutionary Approach Kaustuv Nag1, Tandra Pal2, and Nikhil R. Pal3 1Department of Instrumentation and Electronics Engineering, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India kaustuv.nag@gmail.com 2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Durgapur, India tandra.pal@gmail.com 3Electronics and Communication Sciences Unit (ECSU), Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta, India nikhil@isical.ac.in Abstract. In fuzzy group decision making problems, we often use multi- objective evolutionary optimization. The optimizers search through the whole search space and provide a set of nondominated solutions. But, sometimes the decision makers express their prior preferences using fuzzy numbers. In this case, the optimizers search in the preferred soft region and provide solutions with higher consensus. If perturbation in the de- cision variable space is unavoidable, we also need to search for robust solutions. Again, this perturbation a ects the degree of consensus of the solutions. This leads to search for solutions those are robust to their degree of consensus. In this work, we address these issues by rede n- ing consensus and proposing a new measure called robust consensus. We also provide a reformulation mechanism for multiobjective optimization problems. Our experimental results show that the proposed method is capable of nding robust solutions having robust consensus in the spec- i ed soft region. Keywords: Consensus, evolutionary algorithms, fuzzy group decision making, multiobjective optimization, robustness. 1 Introduction Most of the real world optimization problems have multiple con icting objec- tives. That is why, in the last few decades multiobjective optimization (MOO) has drawn a lot of research interests. Multiobjective optimizers, e.g., genetic al- gorithms (GAs), after completion of their search process, usually provide a set of nondominated solutions, such that, without additional knowledge further re- duction of the solution set is not possible. It is left to decision makers (DMs ) choice to pick the right solution from the solution set. 2 K. Nag et. al. It is hard from DMs point of view to nd the appropriate solution from a set of nondominated solutions. Besides, we cannot rely on a single DM due to her lack of knowledge about all the objectives. As an example, in an interview board, a set of experts from di erent knowledge domains makes a consensus decision. Another example is how a decision is made by an organization - here the board of directors makes the decision. Group decision making (GDM), thus, is a point of interest. In most cases, the DMs cannot express their speci c choices a priori. Rather they provide a rough idea about their choices. Fuzzy group decision making (FGDM) is one of the popular ways to address this issue. A popular FGDM strategy is that each DM expresses her approximate prior opinion by providing a fuzzy reference point for each objective. Again, the weights of all the DMs may not necessarily be the same. In this case, a suitable aggregation operator is used to nd the optimal solution. In the above mentioned FGDM strategy, a problem associated with the DMs is that their opinions often change. For example, the board of directors of a company may change. Even, individual DM s choice evolves depending on her past experiences. In this case, it becomes important to nd solutions, which will be acceptable by the DMs even if some of DMs change their individual preference. Consensus is a measure to address this issue. In FGDM, usually consensus is used to nd the closeness among the DMs choices [3], [18]. It is expected that the set of solutions chosen nally should be as close as possible to the collective decision. There are several unavoidable circumstances when the solutions perturb in decision variable space. In those cases, we prefer the solutions which are robust to such perturbations. In the literature, there are several de nitions of robustness [4], [2] in multiobjective optimization. Robustness is de ned either in objective space or in variable space. In this work, we nd solutions which are robust to their perturbation in the variable space. Again, when a solution gets perturbed in the variable space, it is likely to be shifted in the objective space. As a consequence, the consensus of the solution also changes. So, we want to nd solutions which will be robust with respect to its consensus. In this work, we assume that the DMs provide some soft constraints to the multiobjective optimizer to restrict the search process to a set of speci c regions of the search space, and the optimizer provides robust solutions from this roughly speci ed preference regions. We reformulate the optimization problem to obtain robust solutions from these speci ed regions, and nd solutions which are robust with respect to their degree of consensus. For this purpose we de ne a new measure called robust consensus. 2 Preliminary Concepts 2.1 Multiobjective Optimization In a multiobjective optimization problem (MOP), we intend to optimize more than one con icting objectives, sometimes trying to satisfy also a set of equality Robust Consensus 3 and inequality constraints. In this work, however, we consider only unconstrained MOPs (UMOPs). An UMOP can always be restated as an unconstrained mul- tiobjective minimization problem (UMMP) and throughout this paper, unless mentioned speci cally, we always consider UMMPs. To be more speci c about UMMPs, below we formally de ne several basics of it. De nition 1. Formally an UMMP can be de ned as in ( 1). minimize f(x) = (f1(x), f2(x), , fm(x)), x , (1) where Rn is the variable space, f : Rn Rm, and the functions fi(i = 1, 2, , m) are called objective functions. De nition 2. A solution f(x1), x1 , is said to dominate another solution f(x2), x2 , denoted by f(x1) f(x2), if i, fi(x1) fi(x2), and j, s.t., fj(x1)<fj(x2). De nition 3. A solution f(x ), x is called a Pareto optimal solution, if x , s.t., f(x) f(x ). A set of all such solutions in the objective space is called Pareto front. The corresponding set of points in the decision variable space is called the Pareto Set. De nition 4. A set of solutions S is called a nondominated set of solutions, if u S, v S, s.t., v u. There are many multiobjective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) in the lit- erature to solve MOPs. SPEA2 [21], NSGA-II [5] etc. are some of the popular MOEAs. The default goal of these algorithms is to provide the DMs a set of non- dominated solutions, which is close to, and well spread along the Pareto front. If the DMs want to provide some prior hard preferences, they represent them as constraints. In many cases, however, the DMs want to search in a particular region of the search space corresponding to some particular area of the Pareto front. Sometimes, they want to stop searching much before the Pareto front is reached. Again, DMs may like to search in robust regions, as well as the regions where they have experiences. In these cases, the searching needs to be guided to those speci c regions. In our work, we address this issue by embedding consensus in the search process. 2.2 Fuzzy Group Decision Making Group Decision Making (GDM) has been proven to be useful in many disciplines, like emergency management [20], situation assessment [16], product development [15], and accident evaluation [14]. In most cases, GDM is performed in two steps (processes): consensus process and selection process [18]. In consensus process, 4 K. Nag et. al. the target is to nd the maximum degree of agreement among the DMs. The selection process is used to obtain the solution set of alternatives in accordance with the collective opinions of DMs. For this model it is desirable to obtain the maximum degree of consensus before applying the selection process. In our work, however, we propose an embedded model, where these two processes are considered in an integrated manner. The DMs often prefer to provide some prior soft preferences regarding their choices. In fuzzy group decision making (FGDM), one way to represent DM s choices is to express their preferences by fuzzy numbers. Often these numbers are far away from the Pareto front. In that case we need to restrict the search in that speci ed region. Again, if there are perturbations in the decision variable space, it is possible that though a solution is robust in objective space, its degree of consensus varies highly. In this case, we want to get solutions those are robust with respect to their consensus. 2.3 Related Works There are few works on FGDM problems with consensus and/or robustness. However, there is no work, as per our knowledge, that have incorporated ro- bustness and consensus in an integrated manner in the FGDM using MOOs. Works on robustness in MOEAs can be found in [2], [4]. Some works related to consensus are there in [9], [10], [12], [13]. A work, somewhat similar to us, can be found in [18]. Nevertheless, the authors, in [18], did not deal with ro- bust consensus. They used another de nition of robustness. At rst their search procedure would reach the Pareto front, and then, a solution selection scheme based on robustness and consensus is used. It makes their system always trying to provide some solutions from the Pareto front, which may not be the desir- able solutions with respect to consensus as DMs preferences may be far away from it. So, essentially they select consensus solution from the Pareto front. In our work, we evolve solutions from the soft regions expressed by the DMs as their preferred region in the objective space. In [18], the authors have worked on preference robustness, which is de ned by the minimum transition cost in the decision space when a solution is perturbed in the objective space. 3 Problem Formulation Let there be d DMs, denoted as Dj (j = 1, 2, , d). The weight vector associated with the DMs is represented as w = (w1, w2, , wd), s.t. dP j=1 wj = 1. To express their preferences, DMs provide reference points in the objective space, denoted by Rj = (rj1, rj2, , rjm), where rji (i = 1, 2, , m) is the reference value of the ith objective provided by jth DM. In this work, we consider that the DMs provide reference values as triangular fuzzy numbers [19], where each value is represented as triplet, rji = (rlower ji , rmost ji , rupper ji ). The membership value of a Robust Consensus 5 point r is de ned in ( 2). rji(r) =  r rlower ji   rmost ji rlower ji , rlower ji r rmost ji  rupper ji r   rupper ji rmost ji , rmost ji r rupper ji 0, otherwise. (2) Here rlower ji , rmost ji , and rupper ji are respectively the lower bound, most desirable value, and the upper bound of the DM s preference fuzzy number rji. 4 Robustness, Consensus, and Problem Reformulation 4.1 Robustness In the literature, robustness has been de ned in many ways according to the application areas, such as life science, engineering, mathematics, statistics, op- timization, and decision science [2]. In multiobjective optimization, two of the major contributions on robustness can be found in [2], [4]. Among the several de nitions of robustness, in this work, we use the one de ned in [18]. De nition 5. A solution x is called a multiobjective robust solution, if it is a Pareto optimal solution to the multiobjective minimization problem as de ned in ( 3). minimize f e(x) = (f e 1(x), f e 2(x), , f e m(x)), x , subject to f e j (x) = 1 |B (x)| Z y B (x) fj(y)dy, j = 1, , m. (3) The above formulation is de ned with respect to a -neighborhood B (x) of a solution x. A solution which is robust as per the above de nition, according to the literature, is called multiobjective robust solution of type-I [4]. 4.2 Consensus There are several de nitions of consensus in the literature [9], [11], [18]. The drawback in the de nition of consensus presented in [18] is that even if the value of the objective function fi(x) matches exactly with rmost ji , the peak of the membership function i and j, then also there will be a substantial value of dji (fuzzy distance between the solution and the reference point of the jth DM on ith objective [18]) suggesting a mismatch between the computed solution and preferred solution and thereby reducing the consensus. To overcome this drawback, we de ne consensus in the following way. 6 K. Nag et. al. De nition 6. Let w = (w1, w2, , wd) be the weight vector associated with d DMs. Then consensus of a solution x is de ned in ( 4) as follows. consensus(x) = d X j=1 wj j(x), (4) where j(x) is de ned in ( 5). j(x) = ( rj1(f1(x)), rj2(f2(x)), , rjm(fm(x))). (5) Here, j( ) is basically a multidimensional membership function; m is the num- ber of objectives; rji( ), i = 1, 2, , m, is already de ned in ( 2); fi( ), i = 1, 2, , m, is the ith objective function; and ( ) is a t-norm aggregation op- erator which in this work is taken as the min( ). There is a problem with this de nition of consensus: it assumes that a robust solution will always be robust to its degree of consensus. But, this may not always be true. To demonstrate this scenario with an example, let us consider Fig. 1. In this gure, a robust solution x in the variable space and its mapping f(x) in the objective space are shown respectively in the left panel and in the right panel. The preference points in the objective space provided by two DMs, D1 and D2, are shown by + symbol. Let, the weights of the DMs be w1 and w2 respectively, and w1 > w2. Since w1 > w2 and f(x) is closer to D1, the robust solution x is also a solution with good consensus. But when x is perturbed, f(x) no longer is a solution with good consensus. Note that the degree of consensus is not only dependent on the weights but also on membership functions. The neighborhood of x is shown in the left panel and the corresponding perturbation in the objective space is shown in the right panel by the shaded regions. Due to the perturbation of x the objectives get shifted towards D2 s reference point. In this case, the consensus should decrease. In other words, although x is a robust solution, it is not robust to its degree of consensus. To overcome this problem, we need to nd solutions which are robust to their degree of consensus. To address this issue, we de ne a new measure, robust consensus, bellow in ( 6). De nition 7. Robust consensus of a solution is de ned in ( 6). robust consensus(x) = 1 |B (x)| Z z B (x) consensus(z)dz (6) The above formulation is de ned with respect to a -neighborhood (B (x)) of a solution x. Higher value of this measure indicates higher robust consensus of the solution. 4.3 Problem Reformulation for MOEA-FGDM We could use any multiobjective evolutionary algorithm (MOEA) [5], [6], [17], [21], [22] for this task. We have, however, used NSGA-II [5] as the multiobjective Robust Consensus 7 Fig. 1. Showing a solution x, its neighborhood, its mapping (perturbed) in objective space, and two DMs preferred reference points D1 and D2 optimizer. To nd robust solutions, which are also robust consensus, we refor- mulate the m objective UMMP de ned in ( 1) as an (m + 1) objective UMMP as described in ( 7). minimize f e(x) = (f e 1(x), f e 2(x), , f e m(x), robust consensus(x)), subject to x , (7) where f e j (x)s are the same as in ( 3). By solving this problem, we can obtain the desired robust solutions. There is, however, a concern: how to computationally integrate the consensus over a region? We address this problem in the following way. Let, x be a solution. A set of H random points xk (k = 1, 2, , H) is chosen such that k (k = 1, 2, , H), i(i = 1, 2, , n),  x(i) (i) x(i) k  x(i) + (i) , where, x(i) k is the ith component of xk, (i) 0 is the maximum allowed perturbation along ith variable, and n is the number of variables. For simplicity, we consider i, (i) = . However, one can use di erent values of (i)s, and that may be more appropriate for real life problems. For all randomly chosen points we compute the objective (or consensus) values and nd their arithmetic mean. With an increase in H the accuracy level increases. To decrease computational cost, nonetheless, one can choose smaller value of H. The (i)s are very important parameters. The results vary signi cantly with the choice of this parameter value. When = 0, the proposed robust consensus reduces to consensus, and this problem formulation will not provide robust solutions. 5 Test Problem, Experimentation, and Discussions 5.1 Test Problem BINH [1] is a well known UMMP test problem de ned in ( 8). minimize f1(x1, x2) = x2 1 + x2 2, minimize f2(x1, x2) = (x1 5)2 + (x2 5)2 , (8) 8 K. Nag et. al. Table 1. DMs fuzzy reference points for modi ed M-BINH problem Decision Maker (Dj) rj1 rj2 D1 (10.0, 15.0, 20.0) (16.0, 21.0, 26.0) D2 ( 8.5, 14.0, 19.5) (16.0, 22.0, 28.0) D3 (11.0, 16.0, 21.0) (13.0, 20.0, 27.0) D4 ( 8.0, 13.0, 18.0) (15.0, 19.0, 23.0) D5 ( 9.0, 17.0, 25.0) (14.0, 18.0, 22.0) where 5 x1, x2 10. The authors [18] have modi ed this problem to make it suitable for the robustness-consensus FGDM problem. They call it M-BINH. We use the same modi ed formulation. It is described in ( 9). xc p = xmax p + xmin p 2 , r1,p = 0.2, r2,p = xp xmax p , xp = xp, if xp 1 xmin p + oor xp xmin p r1,p ! r1,p, if xp < xc p xc p + oor xp xc p r2,p  r2,p, else, p = 1, 2, minimize f1(x1, x2) = x2 1 + x2 2, minimize f2(x1, x2) = (x1 5)2 + (x2 5)2 , (9) where 0 x1, x2 5, xmin p and xmax p (p = 1, 2) indicate respectively the lower and upper bounds of the variable space. We assume that there are ve DMs and the corresponding weight vector is w = (0.20, 0.20, 0.20, 0.20, 0.20), i.e., all the DMs are equally important. Their fuzzy preference points are presented in Table 1. These parameters are not the same as in [18]. We have changed them to make the problem more suitable to show the e ectiveness of our approach. We reformulate the M-BINH problem in ( 10). minimize f robust M-BINH(x) = (f e 1(x), f e 2(x), robust consensus(x)) , where f e 1(x) = 1 |B (x)| Z y B (x) f1(y)dy, f e 2(x) = 1 |B (x)| Z y B (x) f2(y)dy. (10) Here f1(x) and f2(x) are de ned as in ( 9), and robust consensus is de ned in ( 6). Robust Consensus 9 Fig. 2. Showing nondominated sets S0 1, S0.5 1000, and S1 1000 5.2 Common Parameter Settings We have set population size to 100. Simulated binary crossover (SBX) has been used, where crossover probability pc = 0.95 and distribution index for crossover c = 20. We have used polynomial mutation where mutation probability pm = 1/n and distribution index for mutation m = 10. Here n(= 2) is the number of variables. We have executed NSGA-II for 1000 generations. The reason for choosing such a high number of generations is to allow the searching algorithm enough chance to converge. We have used jMetal 4.4 [7], [8] for the simulation purpose. 5.3 Experiments, Results, and Discussions At rst we execute the algorithm for three pairs of (H, ) parameter sets: (1, 0), (1000, 0.5), and (1000, 1). Let us denote the sets of nondominated solutions ob- tained for these three parameter sets by S0 1, S0.5 1000, and S1 1000 respectively. When H = 1, and = 0, our problem searches for solutions which are not robust both in terms of the objectives and the consensus. To reduce the error in computing robustness, we have used a high value of H. It is worth mentioning that for the parameter pair (1, 0), our problem formulation reduces to simple consensus optimization problem, i.e., in that speci c case, we are searching for consensus solutions which may not be robust in terms of their objectives. However, to ob- serve how the output changes with the change of , we plot the objective values of S0 1 and S0.5 1000 in the left panel, and the objective values of S0 1 and S1 1000 in the right panel in Fig. 2. From Fig. 2, we observe that when increases, the obtained set of solutions moves away from the set S0 1. Basically, with the increase of , i.e., when we search for more robust solutions, the robust consensus of the solutions decreases. In Fig. 2, we have also shown the most desirable points suggested by each DM. Around the coordinate (15, 15) in the objective space, there is a region with more 10 K. Nag et. al. crowded solutions which is close to the region where most of the desirable points suggested by the DMs lie. We observe that with the increase of , this region becomes wider as well as one of the end points of the solution set gets drifted towards the middle region. With the increase of , the system stops in a region which is preferred by the soft choices of the DMs and the obtained solutions are away from the Pareto front of the unaltered UMMP. When changes the t-norm operator ( ) and the weight vector w also play important roles on the direction of the drift of the solution sets. 6 Conclusions In this work, we rede ne consensus and de ne a new measure called robust con- sensus, which indicates the robustness of a multiobjective solution with respect to its consensus among the preferences provided by a set of DMs. We have also shown a reformulation mechanism for multiobjective fuzzy decision making prob- lems. It provides the DMs a set of solutions from their preferred search regions. The DMs express their prior preferences by providing reference points for each objective. Using the multiobjective genetic algorithm NSGA-II, we have suc- cessfully solved a modi ed test problem, M-BINH and shown that the proposed method is capable of providing solutions from the region desired by the DMs. Further, we have shown that the proposed de nition of robust consensus is sen- sitive to its parameter . The e ect of the formulation for di erent aggregation operators is not studied in this work. We intend to do this in our future work. Acknowledgments. Kaustuv Nag is grateful to the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India for providing nancial support in the form of INSPIRE Fellowship (code no. IF120686). References 1. Binh, T.T., Korn, U.: An evolution strategy for the multiobjective optimization. In: Proceedings of the second international Conference on Genetic Algorithms (Mendel96), Brno, Czech Republic. pp. 23 28. Citeseer (1996) 2. Bui, L.T., Abbass, H.A., Barlow, M., Bender, A.: Robustness against the decision- maker s attitude to risk in problems with con icting objectives. Evolutionary Com- putation, IEEE Transactions on 16(1), 1 19 (2012) 3. Cabrerizo, F.J., Moreno, J.M., P erez, I.J., Herrera-Viedma, E.: Analyzing consen- sus approaches in fuzzy group decision making: advantages and drawbacks. Soft Computing 14(5), 451 463 (2010) 4. Deb, K., Gupta, H.: Introducing robustness in multi-objective optimization. Evo- lutionary Computation 14(4), 463 494 (2006) 5. Deb, K., Pratap, A., Agarwal, S., Meyarivan, T.: A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II. Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Transactions on 6(2), 182 197 (2002) 6. Deb, K., et al.: Multi-objective optimization using evolutionary algorithms, vol. 2012. John Wiley & Sons Chichester (2001) Robust Consensus 11 7. Durillo, J., Nebro, A., Alba, E.: The jmetal framework for multi-objective opti- mization: Design and architecture. In: CEC 2010. pp. 4138 4325. Barcelona, Spain (July 2010) 8. Durillo, J.J., Nebro, A.J.: jmetal: A java framework for multi-objective opti- mization. Advances in Engineering Software 42, 760 771 (2011), http://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0965997811001219 9. Herrera, F., Herrera-Viedma, E., Verdegay, J.L.: A model of consensus in group decision making under linguistic assessments. Fuzzy sets and Systems 78(1), 73 87 (1996) 10. Herrera, F., Herrera-Viedma, E., Verdegay, J.L.: Linguistic measures based on fuzzy coincidence for reaching consensus in group decision making. International Journal of Approximate Reasoning 16(3), 309 334 (1997) 11. Herrera-Viedma, E., Herrera, F., Chiclana, F.: A consensus model for multiperson decision making with di erent preference structures. Systems, Man and Cybernet- ics, Part A: Systems and Humans, IEEE Transactions on 32(3), 394 402 (2002) 12. Herrera-Viedma, E., Martinez, L., Mata, F., Chiclana, F.: A consensus support system model for group decision-making problems with multigranular linguistic preference relations. Fuzzy Systems, IEEE Transactions on 13(5), 644 658 (2005) 13. Hsu, H.M., Chen, C.T.: Aggregation of fuzzy opinions under group decision making. Fuzzy sets and systems 79(3), 279 285 (1996) 14. Krohling, R.A., Campanharo, V.C.: Fuzzy TOPSIS for group decision making: A case study for accidents with oil spill in the sea. Expert Systems with Applications 38(4), 4190 4197 (2011) 15. Lu, J., Ma, J., Zhang, G., Zhu, Y., Zeng, X., Koehl, L.: Theme-based compre- hensive evaluation in new product development using fuzzy hierarchical crite- ria group decision-making method. Industrial Electronics, IEEE Transactions on 58(6), 2236 2246 (2011) 16. Lu, J., Zhang, G., Ruan, D.: Intelligent multi-criteria fuzzy group decision-making for situation assessments. Soft Computing 12(3), 289 299 (2008) 17. Nag, K., Pal, T.: A new archive based steady state genetic algorithm. In: Evolu- tionary Computation (CEC), 2012 IEEE Congress on. pp. 1 7. IEEE (2012) 18. Xiong, J., Tan, X., Yang, K.w., Chen, Y.w.: Fuzzy group decision making for multiobjective problems: Tradeo between consensus and robustness. Journal of Applied Mathematics 2013 (2013) 19. Zadeh, L.A.: Fuzzy sets. Information and control 8(3), 338 353 (1965) 20. Zhang, G., Ma, J., Lu, J.: Emergency management evaluation by a fuzzy multi- criteria group decision support system. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment 23(4), 517 527 (2009) 21. Zitzler, E., Laumanns, M., Thiele, L.: SPEA2: Improving the strength pareto evo- lutionary algorithm. In: Giannakoglou, K., Tsahalis, D., Periaux, J., Papailou, P., Fogarty, T. (eds.) EUROGEN 2001. Evolutionary Methods for Design, Optimiza- tion and Control with Applications to Industrial Problems. pp. 95 100. Athens, Greece (2002) 22. Zitzler, E., Thiele, L.: Multiobjective evolutionary algorithms: A comparative case study and the strength pareto approach. Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Trans- actions on 3(4), 257 271 (1999) View publication stats