See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344547159 A Novel Investigation of Attack Strategies via the Involvement of Virtual Humans: A User Study of Josh Waitzkin, a Virtual Chess Grandmaster Conference Paper October 2020 DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-60128-7_48 CITATIONS 7 READS 118 Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Ant colonies for image analysis and representation View project Virtual humans to explore personalities View project All content following this page was uploaded by Khaldoon Dhou on 08 October 2020. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. A novel investigation of attack strategies via the involvement of virtual humans: A user study of Josh Waitzkin, a virtual chess grandmaster Khaldoon Dhou College of Business Administration Texas A&M University-Central Texas Abstract. A growing body of evidence suggests that attack is a signif- icant concept that has been explored by researchers from various disci- plines such as marketing, psychology, and computing. Additionally, there has been substantial research undertaken on the role of attack in chess, which brought signi cant contributions to di erent elds of research. In this paper, the researcher investigates the attack concept in chess, as a strategic game by exploring virtual chess players of di erent strategies. In particular, the researcher explores the performance of an attacking grandmaster against three other class-A players of di erent chess person- alities that vary in controlling the center of the chessboard. To this end, the researcher collected data from four virtual chess players: a grandmas- ter and three class-A players. The selected grandmaster is Josh Waitzkin who is known for his fearless attacking style and deep endgame under- standing. The class-A players have di erent personalities: (1) a player who strongly controls the center of the board; (2) a player who ignores the center; and (3) a player who o ers traps to control his opponent. The researcher measured di erent dependent variables including the er- rors of the players and the moves of the games. The ndings show that class-A players of particular chess personalities perform di erently. Ad- ditionally, the study reveals that there is a positive relationship between the ndings and some of the existing real-life scenarios in the business domain. Keywords: chess, chess personality, virtual humans, attack, Josh Wait- zkin, grandmaster 1 Introduction In the last twenty years, the chess world witnessed many interdisciplinary endeavors from the elds of psychology, arti cial intelligence, and com- puter design. This resulted in many signi cant achievements including a machine being able to defeat Gary Kasparov, the reigning world cham- pion in 1997. Even more, current chess applications in the market are very a ordable and capable to compete at the level of a grandmaster, the highest rank a chess player can attain. Such applications o er use- ful features to chess players among which are providing hints, analyzing 2 Khaldoon Dhou chess positions, and allowing a player to play against another player or computer opponent. Computer opponents can come in a variety of ways such as chess engines or virtual humans. They are widely used by chess players for training and they exist in di erent personalities. Throughout this paper, the term chess personality is de ned as the attitude of a chess player during his games such as an attack, defense, or a mixture of both. The personality of a player can shape the direction of a chess game. For example, some grandmasters start attacking at an early stage of a game, and this might cause their opponents to act defensively. Other players like to get their Queen involved during the opening phase. Investigating the personalities of virtual chess players can play an essential role in addressing many research problems. First, there is evi- dence that employing software loaded with virtual players with di erent personalities plays a crucial role in surgical training using a virtual re- ality simulator [5, 32]. Second, existing research suggests that there is a strong association between chess and business in many aspects such as patience, long-term thinking, and perseverance [19, 21, 23, 29, 30]. Third, rapid developments in building new chess applications have heightened the need for understanding chess personalities [14]. Virtual chess players helped in investigating di erent playing styles by allowing researchers to explore games between chess players of various personalities who ex- isted in di erent eras [12]. Another key thing to remember is that vir- tual humans made it possible to further examine world champions such as Garry Kasparov and many other top grandmasters [12, 14, 15]. Ad- ditionally, relevant work is not only limited to virtual humans, but it also shows existing studies in virtual environments simulating di erent types of biological behaviors such as predator-prey ecosystems and ant colonies [9, 11, 13, 16, 28]. All these studies showed the e ectiveness of simulated behaviors in coding binary information that is widely used in many research activities such as perception and visualization [10, 17, 18]. In this paper, we explore four virtual players: a grandmaster and three other class-A players. The selected grandmaster is Josh Waitzkin, who is known for being a fearless attacker with a deep endgame un- derstanding. The class-A personalities vary in their skills with regards to traps and controlling the center. This paper builds on previous re- search in virtual chess players and provides an important opportunity to advance the understanding of chess personalities. The ndings should make important contributions to the elds of psychology and computer science. The central question in this paper asks about the errors that virtual players of di erent personalities make while playing against each other. The main questions addressed in this paper are: How does Waitzkin behave while playing against class-A players who vary in their controlling the center and trapping an opponent s per- sonality? How are class-A players of various chess personalities related to traps and controlling the center in uenced while competing against Wait- zkin? How is the length of the games played against Waitzkin in uenced by the di erent class-A players employed in the experiment? An exploration of attack strategies via the utilization of virtual humans 3 The overall structure of this paper takes the form of six sections in- cluding this section. Section 2 begins with exploring the related studies and identifying the gaps where further research is needed; Section 3 is concerned with the study design; Section 4 analyzes the results of the experiment and presents the ndings; Section 5 provides a general dis- cussion of the research ndings based on the existing literature; nally, section 6 concludes the paper, and o ers suggestions for future research. 2 Related work A large and growing body of the literature has investigated the psychol- ogy of chess players. Models were developed over the years to understand a chess player s mind. The rst model was o ered by Cleveland [7] and it incorporates the most vital aspects in modern chess theory and focuses on chess development. In 1965, de Groot [8] investigated chess players thinking and memory and how they solve chess problems. De Groot exposed chess players to meaningful chess patterns and asked them to reconstruct them from memory. He found that masters outperformed novice chess players. This was followed up by the study of Chase and Si- mon [6] who did a similar experiment with random chess positions. They found that chess players of various skills failed to reconstruct them. The previous two experiments show the importance of chess patterns in a chess player s skill. Chess players vary in their ability and are ranked according to a rat- ing, which is a number that provides an estimation of a chess player s skill measured against other players in the chess community. Many orga- nizations provide chess ratings such as the World Chess Federation and the United States Chess Federation (USCF). For example, according to the USCF [34], the highest title is a Senior Master, which is awarded to a chess player who maintains a rating of 2400 and above. Below that is a Master, for a player who maintains a rating between 2200 and 2399; Expert between 2000 to 2199; class A between 1800 to 1999 and so on. Chess players are not only characterized by their ratings, but they can also be described by their chess personalities. These personalities are re ected by the playing style of a player during di erent game phases. For example, Marshall (1942-2017) is a risk-taker who o ers sacri ces to gain an advantage during his games [33]. Exploring chess personalities has its roots in psychoanalysis and numerous studies have attempted to investigate it from di erent angles. For example, Jones [24] explored the personality of grandmaster Paul Murphy and identi ed many as- pects in his playing styles such as attack and piece sacri ce. Similarly, Karpman [25] explored the topic of chess personalities and the condi- tions at which certain players play the best. He also identi ed contrasts in personalities among chess grandmasters and the reasons behind some game results. In the same vein, Haran [22] identi ed ve chess personal- ities depending on the opening variation: normal personality, aggressive personality, defensive personality, semi-open personality, and positional personality. 4 Khaldoon Dhou The rapid developments in Arti cial Intelligence and Computing Technology made it possible to include new modern features that en- able further exploration of chess personalities. Among these features are the virtual chess players, which are de ned as computer programs that simulate real chess players of di erent levels from beginners to top-rank grandmasters. Virtual humans opened new research horizons and o ered alternative prospects on how to analyze chess games and explore the psy- chology of di erent players. This began with a study that investigated virtual grandmasters and class-B players that represent actual human chess players [12]. In the study, the author explored the personalities of attacking and defending grandmasters and the outcomes while they com- pete against less skilled players. They found that an attacker grandmas- ter tends to have fewer errors than a defensive grandmaster. Similarly, the author found that the class-B players in the study perform better while competing against an attacker grandmaster. These ndings have grounds in social sciences as research showed that people instinctively seek to per- ceive the reasons behind challenging events and how they in uence their existence when they face them [36]. This view is also supported by the study conducted in [15] showing that an attacker grandmaster performs better as opposed to a defensive grandmaster while competing against class-A players. What s more, these are not the only studies that investi- gated virtual chess players. A recent study explored the chess personality of Garry Kasparov and how he is in uenced by and in uencing class-A players of di erent personalities [14]. All these studies have emphasized the importance of virtual humans and how they are used to explore the personalities of chess players. It is also important to mention that emulating real chess players is a major area of interest within the game industry. One example is Virtual Kasparov [2], developed by Titus, which incorporates simulated chess players of di erent personalities. Similarly, Ubisoft developed the Chessmaster and it o ers many virtual players representing real players including top grandmasters such as Kasparov and Polgar [33]. Overall, all the studies reviewed here and the tremendous industrial advancements in virtual humans highlight the need to further investigate this eld of research. These studies clearly indicate that there is a strong relationship between virtual humans, personalities, and existing real-life scenarios in di erent elds of research including marketing, management, and psychology. However, there remain several aspects of virtual chess players about which relatively little is known. 3 Method 3.1 Participants Participants in this study were virtual chess players of di erent chess per- sonalities. The data for the study was collected from the games between the virtual players participating in the experiment. The virtual players that were chosen for the study simulate Waitzkin, and three other class- A players of di erent personalities. Below is the description of each of the virtual players in the experiment, as provided by Ubisoft [33]: An exploration of attack strategies via the utilization of virtual humans 5 Waitzkin: a well-known chess grandmaster and author who is char- acterized by being a courageous attacker with a deep comprehension of the endgame. Buck: a player who favors openings that include a signi cant por- tion of captured pieces. His vulnerability is his almost negligence of dominating the center of the chessboard. His USCF rating is 2355. J.T.: he plays speci c openings that are outlined to attract his op- ponent to fall into a prepared trap. His USCF rating is 2330. Lili: a player with a comprehensive opening knowledge, however, she favors particular lines of play that can be insigni cantly disad- vantageous. As opposed to Buck, she has excellent control over the chessboard. Her USCF rating is 2394. The selection of these players that represent di erent personalities is in uenced by the categories of moves o ered by Chase and Simon [6, p. 259] such as opening, exchange, defense, and attack. Additionally, Chase and Simon [6] explored ve chess relations between pieces: attack, defense, proximity, color, and type. It is essential to note that the ratings of the class-A players utilized in the experiment were almost identical. 3.2 Materials The simulations were run using the Chessmaster software o ered by Ubisoft [33]. The software is highly praised in the chess community, it plays at the same level as a top-rank grandmaster, and is used in di erent research projects [12, 14, 15]. In the design of the current experiment, the researcher manipulated two independent variables: the color of the grandmaster s pieces, and the class-A player s personality. Each class-A player played 78 games against Waitzkin, where half of the games played by each player were with the white pieces and the other half was with the black pieces. The class-A player s personality independent variable has three levels: the personalities of Buck, J.T., and Lili. The description of their personalities was provided in the previous subsection. The researcher used the Chessmaster for analyzing the games and used the data in the analysis. That is to say, the design involves three dependent variables: The agreement percentage of the moves made by the grandmaster The agreement percentage of the moves made by a class-A player The number of moves in the game: a move is de ned as the White player s move followed by the Black player s move 3.3 Procedure Waitzkin played 78 games against each class-A player utilized in the study. To reduce the chance that the player s color in uences the design, each player plays half of the games in the experiment with white color and the other half with black. 6 Khaldoon Dhou 4 Results The researcher conducted a two-way ANOVA to examine the e ect of two independent variables (grandmaster s color and class-A player s chess personality) on each of the dependent variables. All the e ects were con- sidered statistically signi cant at p < 0.05. There was a signi cant main e ect of the class-A player personality on the number of moves in the games, F(2, 228) = 5.607, p = 0.004. Pairwise comparisons indicate that the signi cant main e ect re ects a signi cant di erence (p = 0.003) between J.T. (M = 68.410) and Lili (M = 57.372). There was a signi cant main e ect of the color of the grandmaster on the agreement percentage of the moves made by Waitzkin, F(1, 228) = 5.919, p = 0.016. This indicates that the Chessmaster agrees more with Waitzkin when he plays with black pieces (M = 98.111%) than when he plays with white pieces (M = 97.385%). Additionally, there was a signi cant main e ect of the color of the grandmaster on the agreement percentage of the moves made by the class-A players, F(1, 228) = 11.132, p = 0.001. More speci cally, the Chessmaster agrees more with the class- A players when Waitzkin plays with the black pieces (M = 94.410%) than white pieces (92.487%). Similarly, there was a signi cant main ef- fect of a class-A player s personality on the agreement percentage of the moves made by class-A players participating in the experiment, F(2, 228) = 3.529, p = 0.031. Pairwise comparisons indicate that the signi cant main e ect re ects signi cant di erences (p = 0.039) between Buck (M = 92.744%) and Lili (M = 94.513%). Fig. 1 shows the Chess- master s agreement percentages on the moves made by Waitzkin and the other class-A players employed in this study. 5 General discussion This study set out with the aim of assessing the importance of chess per- sonality in the errors made by virtual chess players of di erent personal- ities. The results of this study indicate that a chess player can perform di erently depending on the personality of his opponent. Surprisingly, the ndings showed that Waitzkin performed better with black pieces as op- posed to when he had white pieces. Likewise, the virtual class-A players performed better with the black pieces than when they had white pieces. It is interesting to note that previous research indicated that the per- formance of less-skilled chess players, measured by the errors they make is consistent with the performance of their grandmaster opponent. For example, in a former study exploring two groups of chess players: grand- masters and class-B players, the researcher found that class-B players had fewer errors when they played against Anderssen (i.e. an attacker grandmaster), as opposed to when they played against Leko (i.e. defen- sive grandmaster). Similarly, the same study showed that Anderssen had fewer errors than Leko when they both played against the same class-B players. One possible explanation of why Waitzkin in this experiment performed better with black pieces is related to chess opening. A chess An exploration of attack strategies via the utilization of virtual humans 7 Fig. 1. The Chessmaster s agreement percentages on the moves made by Waitzkin and the other class-A players utilized in the study. As shown in the gure, Waitzkin performed the best while competing against Lili as opposed to the other class-A players. Likewise, Lili did the best among the other class-A players employed in the study. player sometimes tends to perform better when he encounters an opening he is familiar with [14]. Openings are not just important in chess, but existing research in the marketing domain showed the importance of carefulness in handling a new product. One example is the purchase of Snapple by Quaker, which owned Gatorade at that time. On the day of declaring that Quaker would purchase Snapple for 1.7 billion dollars, their stock price decreased by about 10%, and three years later, after several attempts to merge Snapple into their environment with Gatorade, Triarc purchased Snapple for 300 million dollars [26]. The example shows that Snapple and Gatorade are di erent brands and should not be treated as equals without carefulness. Likewise, in chess, openings are di erent, and not being familiar with a particular opening can result in making more mistakes and probably losing a game. This is further evidenced by the outcomes of the analysis showing that the games against J.T. last the longest (Fig. 2), although 8 Khaldoon Dhou he has almost the same rating as the other class-A players utilized in this experiment. However, J.T. utilizes opening traps while playing, and these can probably make his opponent further resist, especially if not aware of particular opening lines. Fig. 2. The average number of moves in the study while competing against Waitzkin. The gure shows that on average, the games involving J.T., a players who considers traps in the openings were the longest Another important nding was that, although having almost the same rating, the class-A players in the study performed di erently while competing against Waitzkin. The experimental results revealed that the Chessmaster signi cantly agrees more on the moves made by Lili than the moves made by Buck. Controlling the center is an essential chess strategy and for some chess openings, a player sacri ces material to gain more control of the center of the board [4, 20, 27]. Interestingly, existing research shows that controlling the center, and other activities encoun- tered by students while playing a chess game are analogous to some management principles [4]. In his research, students learn the concept of controlling the center of the board, which leads to controlling the game. Additionally, his research shows that such a concept is compara- ble to winning the domination in the industry and developing into the performing standard [4]. An exploration of attack strategies via the utilization of virtual humans 9 The ndings in this study further support the idea of exploring the personalities of chess players and how players perform while competing against other players. That is to say, the ndings of this study are con- sistent with the ndings of other studies involving virtual chess players con rming that players of the same rating perform di erently depend- ing on the personalities of the opponents they are competing with. For example, in a previous study that investigates the personality of Garry Kasparov, the ndings show that the performance of Kasparov varied while competing against other less-skilled players [14]. 6 Conclusion The purpose of the current study was to determine how a chess grand- master who considers attacking strategies performs while playing against class-A players of di erent personalities. For this purpose, the researcher employs virtual players that simulate Waitzkin, as an attacker grand- master, and other class-A players. Like real players, virtual players have certain characteristics and they follow di erent game strategies such as attack, defense, and controlling the center. The three class-A players vary in their personalities: a player who tends to capture the opponent s pieces, a player who considers o ering traps in the opening phase, and a player with solid center control and comprehensive opening knowledge. This study has shown that a grandmaster performs di erently de- pending on his opponent s strategy. Likewise, players of the same rat- ing perform di erently while competing against the same grandmaster. These ndings are consistent with the previous ndings exploring grand- masters and less skilled players [12, 14, 15]. For example, class-B players of almost the same ratings and di erent chess personalities had di erent reactions while competing with two grandmasters of di erent styles [12]. Likewise, the same study showed that Anderssen, an aggressive grand- master performed better than Leko while competing against less skilled players of the same rating category. The ndings in this study suggest that in general, chess personality is a crucial factor to consider when evaluating the outcomes of chess games between di erent players. In other words, although chess players are evaluated based on their chess ratings, this does not seem to be the only way to assess their performance. Additionally, since chess is a fun- damentally strategic game, these ndings can be extended to be explored in other domains such as psychology, business, and computing. The nd- ings reported here shed new light on the psychology of competition and how the personalities of virtual humans are related to many aspects in domains exploring many attitudes such as aggressiveness and defense. That is to say, the researcher believes that the present study lays the groundwork for future research into exploring how virtual humans can aid in understanding new elements in business strategies. To develop a full picture of the personalities of chess players, additional studies will be needed that explore di erent aspects of personalities. For example, further studies, which take personality traits into account, will need to be undertaken [1, 3, 31, 35]. 10 Khaldoon Dhou References 1. Al-Samarraie, H., Sarsam, S.M., Alzahrani, A.I., Alalwan, N., Ma- sood, M.: The role of personality characteristics in informing our preference for visual presentation: An eye movement study. Jour- nal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments 8(6), 709 719 (2016) 2. Butts, S.: Virtaul kasparov. Online (April 2002), http://www.ign. com/articles/2002/04/19/virtual-kasparov, retrieved on March 20, 2017 3. Caci, B., Cardaci, M., Miceli, S.: Autobiographical memory, per- sonality, and facebook mementos. Europe s Journal of Psychology 15(3), 614 636 (Sep 2019), https://ejop.psychopen.eu/index. php/ejop/article/view/1713 4. Cannice, M.V.: The right moves: Creating experiential management learning with chess. The International Journal of Management Ed- ucation 11(1), 25 33 (2013), http://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S1472811712000535 5. Chalhoub, E., Tanos, V., Campo, R., Kesrouani, A., El Rassy, E., Rizkallah, J., Chalhoub, D., Walter, C., Sleiman, Z.: The role of video games in facilitating the psychomotor skills training in laparoscopic surgery. Gynecological Surgery 13(4), 419 424 (2016) 6. Chase, W.G., Simon, H.A.: The mind s eye in chess. (1973) 7. Cleveland, A.A.: The psychology of chess and of learning to play it. The American Journal of Psychology 18(3), 269 308 (1907) 8. De Groot, A.: Thought and choice in chess (1965) 9. Dhou, K., Cruzen, C.: An innovative chain coding technique for com- pression based on the concept of biological reproduction: An agent- based modeling approach. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 6(6), 9308 9315 (2019) 10. Dhou, K.: Toward a Better Understanding of Viewers Perceptions of Tag Clouds: Relative Size Judgment. Ph.D. thesis, The University of North Carolina at Charlotte, USA (2013) 11. Dhou, K.: A novel agent-based modeling approach for image coding and lossless compression based on the wolf-sheep predation model. In: Shi, Y., Fu, H., Tian, Y., Krzhizhanovskaya, V.V., Lees, M.H., Dongarra, J., Sloot, P.M.A. (eds.) Computational Science ICCS 2018. pp. 117 128. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2018) 12. Dhou, K.: Towards a better understanding of chess players person- alities: A study using virtual chess players. In: Kurosu, M. (ed.) Human-Computer Interaction. Interaction Technologies. pp. 435 446. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2018) 13. Dhou, K.: An innovative design of a hybrid chain coding algorithm for bi-level image compression using an agent-based modeling ap- proach. Applied Soft Computing 79, 94 110 (2019), http://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1568494619301425 14. Dhou, K.: An innovative employment of virtual humans to explore the chess personalities of Garry Kasparov and other class-A players. In: Stephanidis, C. (ed.) HCI International 2019 Late Breaking Pa- pers. pp. 306 319. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2019) An exploration of attack strategies via the utilization of virtual humans 11 15. Dhou, K.: An exploration of chess personalities in grandmasters and class-a players using virtual humans. International Journal of Enter- tainment Technology and Management (2020) 16. Dhou, K.: A new chain coding mechanism for compression stimu- lated by a virtual environment of a predator-prey ecosystem. Future Generation Computer Systems 102, 650 669 (2020), http://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X1832630X 17. Dhou, K., Hadzikadic, M., Faust, M.: Typeface size and weight and word location in uence on relative size judgments in tag clouds. Journal of Visual Languages & Computing 44, 97 105 (2018), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S1045926X16300210 18. Dhou, K.K., Kosara, R., Hadzikadic, M., Faust, M.: Size judgment and comparison in tag clouds. IEEE Visualization Poster Proceed- ings (2013) 19. Dilmaghani, M.: Gender di erences in performance under time constraint: Evidence from chess tournaments. Journal of Behav- ioral and Experimental Economics p. 101505 (2019), http://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214804319303052 20. Fischer, R.: A bust to the king s gambit. American Chess Quarterly pp. 3 9 (2015) 21. Graber, R.S.: Business lessons from chess: A discussion of parallels between chess strategy and business strategy, and how chess can have applications for business education. Academy of Educational Leadership Journal 13(1), 79 (2009) 22. Haran, A.: Collaborative computer personalities in the game of chess. Ph.D. thesis, Dublin City University (2002) 23. Hunt, S., Cangemi, J.: Want to improve your leadership skills? play chess! Education 134(3), 359 368 (2014) 24. Jones, E.: The problem of paul morphy: a contribution to the psycho- analysis of chess. The International Journal of Psycho-Analysis 12, 1 (1931) 25. Karpman, B.: The psychology of chess:(richard reti). The Psychoan- alytic Review (1913-1957) 24, 54 (1937) 26. Lehn, K.M., Zhao, M.: Ceo turnover after acquisitions: are bad bid- ders red? The Journal of Finance 61(4), 1759 1811 (2006) 27. Montero, B., Evans, C.: Intuitions without concepts lose the game: mindedness in the art of chess. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 10(2), 175 194 (2011) 28. Mouring, M., Dhou, K., Hadzikadic, M.: A novel algorithm for bi- level image coding and lossless compression based on virtual ant colonies. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Complexity, Future Information Systems and Risk - Volume 1: COM- PLEXIS. pp. 72 78 (2018) 29. Nielsen, C.: The global chess game ... or is it go? market-entry strategies for emerging markets. Thunderbird International Business Review 47(4), 397 427 (2005), https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/ doi/abs/10.1002/tie.20060 30. Rice, B.: Three moves ahead: What chess can teach you about busi- ness. John Wiley & Sons (2010) 12 Khaldoon Dhou 31. Sarsam, S.M., Al-Samarraie, H.: Towards incorporating personality into the design of an interface: a method for facilitating users inter- action with the display. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 28(1), 75 96 (2018) 32. Schlickum, M.K., Hedman, L., Enochsson, L., Kjellin, A., Fell ander- Tsai, L.: Systematic video game training in surgical novices im- proves performance in virtual reality endoscopic surgical simulators: a prospective randomized study. World journal of surgery 33(11), 2360 2367 (2009) 33. Ubisoft: Chessmaster grandmaster edition, http://chessmaster. uk.ubi.com/xi/index.php 34. US Chess Federation: USCF Ratings Distribu- tion Charts. Online (October 2015), retrieved from: http://archive.uschess.org/ratings/ratedist.php 35. Vollst adt-Klein, S., Grimm, O., Kirsch, P., Bilali c, M.: Person- ality of elite male and female chess players and its relation to chess skill. Learning and Individual Di erences 20(5), 517 521 (2010), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S1041608010000403 36. Wise, D.M., Rosqvist, J.: Explanatory style and well-being. Compre- hensive handbook of personality and psychopathology p. 285 (2006) View publication stats