See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325468290 Towards a Better Understanding of Chess Players Personalities: A Study Using Virtual Chess Players Chapter June 2018 DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-91250-9_34 CITATIONS 17 READS 11,568 Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Ant colonies for image analysis and representation View project Virtual humans to explore personalities View project All content following this page was uploaded by Khaldoon Dhou on 16 July 2018. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. Towards a Better Understanding of Chess Players Personalities: A Study Using Virtual Chess Players Khaldoon Dhou Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Missouri St. Louis Abstract. Virtual humans emerged as a topic of research in HCI and they have been used for various purposes. This paper explores the be- havior of chess players in a virtual chess environment to gain more un- derstanding about chess personalities. In particular, the focus of this research is investigating attack and defense strategies used by virtual chess grandmasters against di erent virtual class-B personalities who vary in their strength in the di erent stages of a game. These attack and defense strategies have attracted much attention in the chess com- munity and are considered among the main aspects to chess players. They occur in di erent phases of the game: opening, middle game and endgame. The researcher examines virtual chess players to understand the psychology of competition between two grandmasters (attacker, de- fender) and three class-B chess players with di erent personalities: (a) strong at openings; (b) weak at openings, but strong at endgames and (c) balanced player. The virtual humans in this research represent per- sonalities of real players. The empirical players results showed that the personalities could in uence the error and the number of moves of the game for both grandmasters and class-B players. Such ndings can be used in designing virtual chess players. Keywords: virtual humans, chess, attack, defense, personality 1 Introduction Computer chess has grown very rapidly in the last 30 years. This was the result of many achievements which demonstrated how computers could change the game of chess including a computer being able to defeat the world champion, Gary Kasparov [21]. One of the most signi cant achievements in the AI chess is the development of virtual chess players. These are imaginary players with various personalities associated with chess (i.e. attacker and defender). They are introduced by companies such as Titus and Ubisoft [4, 30]. Such virtual humans represent real chess players such as Kasparov and Anand and play at almost the same level of strength. In this research study, chess personality is de ned as the attitude of the virtual chess player during the chess game such as attack or defense. This can re ect the player s strength and weakness during certain phases of the game (i.e. 2 Khaldoon Dhou opening, middle and endgame). Di erent chess players have di erent attitudes towards the opponent which shape their personalities during the game. Exploring chess personalities is important for many reasons. First, it can help chess developers design chess programs which simulate humans. Second, it can help in understanding the behavior of human players by identifying the reasons on why players lose games which can be a challenging task [29]. Interestingly, understanding chess personalities can pave the way for a new direction of research in the medical eld. Research shows that the Chessmaster software improved surgical training undertaken in a virtual environment [26]. Each virtual player has a rating, which is a number that measures the relative skill of the player in his games against other players in the chess community [11]; the higher the rating, the stronger the chess player. Organizations such as United States Chess Federation (USCF) and the World Chess Federation provide these ratings to chess players. Players can be distributed into di erent classes based on their rating. For example, in the USCF System, a senior master has a rating of 2400 and above; a master s rating ranges from 2200 to 2399; expert from 2000 to 2199; class A from 1800 to 1999; class B from 1600 to 1799 and class C from 1400 to 1599 [12]. In this paper, ve Ubisoft virtual humans are examined: two grandmasters and three class-B players [30]. These players vary in their personalities. Two chess grandmaster personalities were selected: Supreme Defender and and Early Attacker against three class-B player personalities: A personality that is strong at the endgame, but plays weak openings; A personality with strong openings; and a balanced player. This research explores the following questions: How do virtual grandmasters with identical ratings and di erent personali- ties (attacking and defensive) perform while playing against various chess-B players with di erent strengths at each phase of the game? How do virtual class-B chess players of di erent personalities re ected in di erent phases throughout the game, behave whilst playing against virtual grandmasters with di erent personalities (i.e. attacker and defender)? Do virtual grandmasters make more errors when they play against a virtual class-B player who is strong at the opening as opposed to a class-B player who is strong at the endgame and plays vulnerable openings? 2 Related work Chess has been an attractive domain for researchers of di erent elds. An early work aiming to understand the psychology of chess players was done by de Groot, a psychologist who studied chess players of various skills [9]. de Groot constructed meaningful chess patterns and then asked chess players of various skills to re- construct them from memory. He found that chess masters outperformed novice players. A follow up was done by Chase and Simon [6] who studied chess players of di erent strengths and found that masters learn more than novice players. The two studies show that chess masters are able to detect patterns of pieces over the How can virtual players help us understand the outcome of chess games? 3 chess board, which allows them to play a stronger game using memorized moves in a short amount of time as opposed to novice players. These classical studies were subjected to further research and development in many perspectives. Pow- ell et al. [22] utilized fMRI in male beginner chess players to locate the cortical parts in the brain related to chess. Similarly, Burgoyne et al. [3] investigated the connection between chess and cognitive skills. Their ndings revealed a pos- itive correlation between chess and uid reasoning, comprehension-knowledge, short-term memory and processing speed. Chess rating is used as a metric to measure the strength of each player against others in the community. Players can be classi ed into di erent categories (i.e. grandmasters, class-A players) according to their rating. A considerable amount of classical literature has been published on chess ratings and class-B players. For example, Calderwood et al. [5] investigated the in uence of time pressure on class-B players and grandmasters. Their research supports the classical ndings that players with high rating depend on pattern recognition more than less skilled players. Similarly, Goldin [15] investigated chess players of various classes and their ndings were consistent with those of Calderwood et al. [5]. Likewise, Sheridan and Reingold [27] investigated eye movements of chess players that vary in their skill and found that reaction times were faster for experts than less skilled players. In a di erent vein, Lane and Chang [18] conducted tests involving chess positions and their ndings support the evidence of the signi cance of pattern recognition in making strong moves among skilled chess players. Chess players of various levels (i.e. grandmasters and class-B players) vary in their personalities. For example, some players might have an attacking attitude, while others might be more defensive and some could be a mixture of both. These attitudes can be clearly seen in di erent phases of the game. Various studies in the literature of arti cial intelligence and cognitive psychology investigated these attitudes. For example, Botvinnik [2] explored attack and defense in solving chess tasks and calculated a function for an attack path. Attack and defense are also among the most important characteristics of chess personalities. These personalities have not only attracted the attention of researchers from the AI domain, but they are also of great interest to cognitive psychologists. An example is the study by Saariluoma [25] who asked players to detect quickly whether the king was attacked or not. He found that skilled players were faster than others who were less skilled in completing the task. Chess pieces are essential pieces of attack and defense in chess and have also been explored in the literature by Rasskin-Gutman [23]. Virtual chess players have been examined in research through di erent per- spectives. Kov acs et al [17] developed a virtual chess player which applies di er- ent styles in communication such as perceiving the emotions and talking with the opponent. While developing a virtual human is a commendable work, their study did not provide any quantitative analysis of its performance. Along with virtual chess players, the extensive research revealed existing literature in the area of virtual humans and their applications in di erent elds. One example is SimSen- sei Kiosk, which acts like a human nurse and communicates with patients [10]. 4 Khaldoon Dhou Similarly, Kenny et al. [16] applied virtual humans in diagnosis and training. These virtual humans used in the medical eld can have many advantages. For instance, a person can disclose more information to an agent than what they provide to a human [20, 24, 28]. Virtual humans behave to a signi cant extent like real human beings [28]. Although there has been existing research on virtual humans in chess and other domains, the extensive literature review did not reveal any study that involved analyzing the personalities of virtual chess players and the di erences between them when they play against each other. In other words, all the pre- vious studies did not explore the error rates of di erent chess personalities and how they perform while playing against other chess personalities. The extensive literature review revealed that this is the rst HCI study that analyzes chess personalities of virtual chess players. Chess players personalities may have an impact on the chess game, thus they need to be explored further. In addition, they might help researchers further understand the behavior of people in real life settings. 3 Experiment The focus of this experiment is to understand the relationship between errors, number of moves and personalities of di erent virtual humans. The goals of this experiment are: Explore the errors made by virtual grandmasters (attacking, defensive) while playing against virtual class-B players with various strengths at di erent phases of the game. Examine the errors made by virtual class-B players with di erent strengths in the game phases while playing against virtual grandmasters of di erent personalities. Investigate the relationship between the numbers of moves in a game and the two virtual chess personalities which compete against each other 3.1 Participants For this experiment, ve virtual chess players o ered by Ubisoft [30] were se- lected. These players come with di erent personalities. In this study, there are two grandmaster personalities: Anderssen (Early Attacker) and Leko (Supreme Defense). The three class-B player personalities the researcher picked are: Josh (vulnerable openings, but strong endgame), John (strong openings), and Kanna (Balanced player). 3.2 Materials The design involves the manipulation of two independent variables as follows: How can virtual players help us understand the outcome of chess games? 5 The personality of the grandmasters was manipulated. Half of the games in this experiment were played by a grandmaster with an early attacking personality (Anderssen) and the other half were played by a grandmaster with a supreme defensive personality (Leko). The two virtual grandmasters have the same USCF rating of 2971. The class-B player personality was manipulated according to the strength he demonstrated in di erent game phases. Three virtual personalities were selected: Waitzkin who is strong in endgame but weak at openings, John who plays strong openings, and Kanna who is a balanced player. The USCF ratings of the three players are almost identical: Josh s USCF rating is 1600, John s rating is 1631, and Kanna s rating is 1623. The color of the grandmaster was used as between-subjects factor. In this experiment, there are ve dependent variables measured by the Chessmaster [30]: The total error of the virtual grandmaster The total error of the virtual class-B player The relevant error of the virtual grandmaster The relevant error of the virtual class-B player The number of moves in the game In this research, the move is de ned as the white player s move followed by the black player s move. The metrics total and relevant errors [7] are calculated by the Chessmaster o ered by Ubisoft [30]. The total error is de ned as the di erence between the moves players choose and the optimal ones they could make. The relevant error is de ned in the same way, but it focuses on the moves where the outcome of the game is still not clear yet. The Chessmaster did not provide any details on how the total and relevant errors are calculated and the two de nitions were obtained from [7]. The criteria for choosing the virtual chess players in this research are the following: All virtual grandmasters have the same rating. They only di er in person- alities. The virtual class-B players have almost an identical rating. However, they vary in their strength in di erent game phases. 3.3 Procedure Each grandmaster played 102 games against each class-B player. In order to reduce the chance that a player s color in uences the design, each player plays half of the games in the experiment with white color and the other half with black. 4 Results The dependent variables were recorded for each game in the experiment. Each dependent variable was submitted to two grandmaster personality styles (Leko 6 Khaldoon Dhou and Anderssen) by 3 class-B player personality styles (Josh, John and Kanna) repeated measures ANOVA. The color of the grandmaster was used as between- subjects factor. All e ects were reported as signi cant at p < 0.05. Mauchly s test was used for sphericity testing and Greenhouse-Geisser correction was applied if the assumption of sphericity was violated. 4.1 The total error of the virtual grandmaster The main e ect of the grandmaster s personality is signi cant, F(1, 100) = 13.975, p < 0.001, indicating that the total errors of Leko (M = 1.874, SD = 0.119) are larger than the total errors of Anderssen (M = 0.954, SD = 0.119). Moreover, there is a signi cant main e ect of the class-B player s personal- ity, F(1.809, 180.910) = 5.338, p = 0.007. Contrasts reveal that the total er- rors of grandmasters when playing against John (M = 2.010, SD = 0.289) are larger than the total errors of grandmasters when playing against Josh (M = 1.102, SD = 0.170), F(1, 100) = 7.826, p = 0.006 and when playing against Kanna (M = 1.117, SD = 0.187), F(1, 100) = 6.251, p = 0.014. 4.2 The total error of the virtual class-B player The main e ect of the grandmaster s personality is signi cant, F(1, 100) = 74.734, p < 0.001. This indicates that the total errors of the three class-B players against a grandmaster with a defensive style (M = 11.885) are larger than the total errors of the class-B players against a grandmaster with an attacking style (M = 8.534). In addition, the main e ect of the class-B player s personality is signi cant, F(1.873, 187.281) = 12.356, p < 0.001. Contrasts reveal that the total errors of Kanna (M = 11.738, SD = 0.384) are larger that the total errors of Josh (M = 9.189, SD = 0.303), F(1, 100) = 26.911, p < 0.001 and the total errors of John (M = 9.701, SD = 0.434), F(1, 100) = 11.248, p = 0.001. Figure 1 shows the mean total error of grandmasters and class-B players while playing against each other. A defensive grandmaster makes more mistakes than an attacking grandmaster. Furthermore, a balanced player makes more mistakes than the two players who are strong in opening and endgame. 4.3 The relevant error of the virtual grandmaster The main e ect of the grandmaster s personality on the relevant error of grand- masters is signi cant, F(1, 100) = 13.958, p < 0.001. This indicates that the relevant errors of Leko (M = 0.316, SD = 0.059) are larger than the relevant errors of Anderssen (M = 0.069, SD = 0.028). 4.4 The relevant error of the class-B player The main e ect of the grandmaster s personality is signi cant, F(1, 100) = 30.177, p < 0.001. This indicates that the relevant errors of class-B players How can virtual players help us understand the outcome of chess games? 7 Fig. 1. Mean total error of virtual class-B players and grandmasters playing against Leko (M = 3.390, SD = 0.115) are larger than the relevant errors of class-B players playing against Anderssen (M = 2.543, SD = 0.096). Furthermore, the main e ect of the class-B player s personality is signi cant, F(2, 200) = 16.104, p < 0.001. Contrasts revealed that the relevant errors made by Kanna (M = 3.581, SD = 0.110) are larger than the relevant errors made by Josh (M = 2.6, SD = 0.13), F(1, 100) = 31.166, p < 0.001 and John (M = 2.717, SD = 0.15), F(1, 100) = 19.862, p < 0.001. Figure 2 shows the mean relevant error of virtual class-B players and grandmasters in this experi- ment. 4.5 The number of moves in the game The main e ect of the grandmaster s personality is signi cant, F(1, 100) = 12.740, p = 0.001. This indicates that the number of moves played by a grand- master with an attacking style (M = 45.516, SD = 0.601) is higher than the number of moves played by a grandmaster with a defensive style (M = 42.729, SD = 0.0.538). The main e ect of the class-B player s personality is also signi cant, F(1.676, 167.627) = 30.361, p < 0.001. Contrasts reveal that the number of moves in games played by grandmasters against Josh (M = 46.368, SD = 0.639) or John (M = 46.093, SD = 0.882) is larger than the num- ber of moves in games played by grandmasters against Kanna (M = 39.907, SD = 8 Khaldoon Dhou Fig. 2. Mean relevant error of virtual class-B players and grandmasters 0.459). Figure 3 shows the mean number of moves in games between virtual grandmasters and class-B players where more moves are associated with an at- tacking grandmaster. Additionally, games against Kanna have the least number of moves. 5 Discussion The empirical results showed that a grandmaster with a defensive style tends to have a higher error than a grandmaster with an attacking style when playing against players with di erent strengths in the various game stages (Figures 1 and 2). This is probably because an attacker grandmaster has built-in attacking traps and can take control of the game, which makes him less subject to errors than a grandmaster who plays defensively and must respond to the attacks from an opponent. In addition, this study explores the performance of three class-B players who di er in their strength during the di erent game phases (i.e. player who plays strong endgames and weak openings as opposed to a player who plays strong openings and weak endgames). The ndings revealed that the players strength in di erent phases in uenced the total and relevant errors of class-B chess players during their games against attacking and defensive grandmasters. How can virtual players help us understand the outcome of chess games? 9 Fig. 3. Mean number of moves The results showed that a class-B chess player who is strong at either the opening or endgame performs better than a player who is balanced when playing against a grandmaster with attacking or defensive style. For example, Josh who is very sharp at the endgame and John who had strong openings performed better than Kanna despite that the three players have almost the same rating. These ndings show the importance of studying chess openings and endgames. The grandmaster personality had an e ect on the class-B players at di erent stages of the game: The errors of the class-B players were always higher when they played against a grandmaster with a defensive style. A plausible psycholog- ical explanation is that people naturally try to understand the cause of di cult events and how they can a ect their lives when they encounter them [31, p. 285]. Thus, an initial attack during the game probably makes class-B players try to understand the scenarios deeper at an early stage than when they are playing against a defensive grandmaster who does not initiate an attack. As for class-B players, the player who was balanced during all stages of the game had a higher error than a chess player who was sharp at either the opening or the endgame stage. On average, grandmasters could beat a class-B player with a balanced style with less number of moves as compared to a player who is strong at either opening or endgame. This shows the importance of the opening training in the game, which is also supported by other researchers in the chess literature 10 Khaldoon Dhou [13, 19]. Similarly, the results indicate that the endgame is as important as the opening phase to the game s outcome [13]. As for the two groups of players, grandmasters performed better than class- B players and they made less errors. This matches with the ndings of Cowley and Byrne [8] that chessmasters tend to evaluate their moves more realistically than novice players. This can be explained by the Chunking Model, according to which the skill of the chess player is based on two factors: the ability to search the tree of moves for a strong move (i.e. success is rated against the subsequent moves derived from it); and the ability to recognize chess patterns quickly and to discover the strong moves [14]. The recognition of chess patterns allows players to save time, which is important to their chance of success, given the limited time available and the number of relevant possibilities through the game. The chess master typically has a huge quantity of large chunks in his Long Term Memory (LTM), therefore he is able to to identify the strong moves based on the positions viewed on the chessboard [14]. These ndings highlight the need for continued research on chess personalities in virtual environments. Further investigations to studies of competition between virtual humans of di erent personalities might help researchers identify how players of di erent personalities can perform against others who vary in their chess skill. For example, one approach can be via designing a chess software to assess the performance of a chess player against di erent personalities in the community and provide a feedback on the weakness points and how they can be addressed. In addition, chess software designers could consider building a software which detects chess personality based on chess opponents and then suggesting di erent virtual opponents based on the personality and not just the rating. The ndings in this research can be bene cial to design virtual humans to assist in chess training. For example, research indicated the power of virtual humans in assisting students in learning topics in di erent areas such as medical education [1]. Virtual environments can also play an educational role in chess itself, by utilizing virtual humans in helping chess students gain many topics depending on the shortcomings they have. Virtual players can also be used to assess chess players and get a history about them after they play against players of di erent personalities. For example, the focus of a new research direction could be identifying the style of chess players while they play against di erent chess humans. This makes it mandatory to analyze more personalities to be used by chess players to identify the best training techniques. 6 Conclusion This paper has explored di erent virtual chess players and how they perform when they play against each other. In this research, the researcher chose two virtual grandmasters and three class-B virtual players. The ndings show that the attacker personality tends to make less errors than a defensive personality How can virtual players help us understand the outcome of chess games? 11 when playing against di erent class-B players. In addition, the games are longer when playing against an attacker personality. The results showed that class-B players who are strong at either the opening or endgame perform better than players who are balanced when playing against a grandmaster with attacking or defensive style. In addition the number of moves is the least when playing against a balanced player. This research allows us to gain a deeper understanding of di erent chess per- sonalities, and thus to further understand the psychology of competition between di erent personalities. Understanding chess personalities enables future research to predict chess results based on the personality of the players. A future topic of research could examine the physiology of di erent chess personalities, just as this study examined the psychological aspects of those personalities. References 1. Berman, N.B., Durning, S.J., Fischer, M.R., Huwendiek, S., Triola, M.M.: The role for virtual patients in the future of medical education. Academic medicine 91(9), 1217 1222 (2016) 2. Botvinnik, M.: A mathematical representation of chess. In: Computers, Chess and Long-Range Planning, pp. 11 25. Springer (1970) 3. Burgoyne, A.P., Sala, G., Gobet, F., Macnamara, B.N., Campitelli, G., Hambrick, D.Z.: The relationship between cognitive ability and chess skill: A comprehensive meta-analysis. Intelligence 59, 72 83 (2016) 4. Butts, S.: Virtaul kasparov. Online (April 2002), http://www.ign.com/articles/ 2002/04/19/virtual-kasparov, retrieved on March 20, 2017 5. Calderwood, R., Klein, G.A., Crandall, B.W.: Time pressure, skill, and move qual- ity in chess. The American journal of psychology pp. 481 493 (1988) 6. Chase, W.G., Simon, H.A.: The mind s eye in chess. (1973) 7. Chess.com: chessmaster 9000 questions. Online, retrieved on Nov 1, 2015 8. Cowley, M.B., Byrne, R.M.: Chess masters hypothesis testing. In: International Peer Reviewed Conference Proceedings (2004) 9. De Groot, A.D.: Thought and choice in chess, vol. 4. Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG (1978) 10. DeVault, D., Artstein, R., Benn, G., Dey, T., Fast, E., Gainer, A., Georgila, K., Gratch, J., Hartholt, A., Lhommet, M., et al.: Simsensei kiosk: A virtual human interviewer for healthcare decision support. In: Proceedings of the 2014 interna- tional conference on Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems. pp. 1061 1068. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (2014) 11. Elo, A.E.: The rating of chessplayers, past and present. Arco Pub. (1978) 12. Federation, U.: Uscf ratings distribution charts. Online (October 2015), retrieved from: http://archive.uschess.org/ratings/ratedist.php 13. Gobet, F., Jansen, P.J.: Training in chess: A scienti c approach. Education and chess (2006) 14. Gobet, F., Simon, H.A.: Templates in chess memory: A mechanism for recalling several boards (1996) 15. Goldin, S.E.: Recognition memory for chess positions: Some preliminary research. The American Journal of Psychology pp. 19 31 (1979) 12 Khaldoon Dhou 16. Kenny, P., Parsons, T., Gratch, J., Rizzo, A.: Virtual humans for assisted health care. In: Proceedings of the 1st international conference on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments. p. 6. ACM (2008) 17. Kov acs, G., Ruttkay, Z., Fazekas, A.: Virtual chess player with emotions. In: 4th Hungarian Conference on Computer Graphics and Geometry (2007) 18. Lane, D.M., Chang, Y.H.A.: Chess knowledge predicts chess memory even after controlling for chess experience: Evidence for the role of high-level processes. Mem- ory & cognition pp. 1 12 (2017) 19. Levene, M., Bar-Ilan, J.: Comparing typical opening move choices made by humans and chess engines. The Computer Journal 50(5), 567 573 (2007) 20. Lucas, G.M., Gratch, J., King, A., Morency, L.P.: Its only a computer: virtual humans increase willingness to disclose. Computers in Human Behavior 37, 94 100 (2014) 21. Newborn, M.: Kasparov versus Deep Blue: Computer chess comes of age. Springer Science & Business Media (2012) 22. Powell, J.L., Grossi, D., Corcoran, R., Gobet, F., Garcia-Finana, M.: The neural correlates of theory of mind and their role during empathy and the game of chess: A functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Neuroscience 355, 149 160 (2017) 23. Rasskin-Gutman, D.: Chess metaphors: arti cial intelligence and the human mind. MIT Press (2009) 24. Rizzo, A., Lucas, G., Gratch, J., Stratou, G., Morency, L.P., Chavez, K., Shilling, R., Scherer, S.: Automatic behavior analysis during a clinical interview with a virtual human. Stud. Healthc. Technol 220, 316 (2016) 25. Saariluoma, P.: Chess players intake of task-relevant cues. Memory & Cognition 13(5), 385 391 (1985) 26. Schlickum, M.K., Hedman, L., Enochsson, L., Kjellin, A., Fell ander-Tsai, L.: Sys- tematic video game training in surgical novices improves performance in virtual reality endoscopic surgical simulators: a prospective randomized study. World jour- nal of surgery 33(11), 2360 2367 (2009) 27. Sheridan, H., Reingold, E.M.: Chess players eye movements reveal rapid recogni- tion of complex visual patterns: Evidence from a chess-related visual search task. Journal of vision 17(3), 4 4 (2017) 28. Swartout, W.R.: Virtual humans as centaurs: Melding real and virtual. In: In- ternational Conference on Virtual, Augmented and Mixed Reality. pp. 356 359. Springer (2016) 29. Thomas, J.C., Richards, J.T.: Achieving psychological simplicity: Measures and methods to reduce cognitive complexity. Human-Computer Interaction: Design Is- sues, Solutions, and Applications 161 (2009) 30. UBISoft: Chessmaster grandmaster edition, http://chessmaster.uk.ubi.com/ xi/index.php 31. Wise, D.M., Rosqvist, J.: Explanatory style and well-being. Comprehensive hand- book of personality and psychopathology p. 285 (2006) View publication stats