See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/344547284 The Interplay Between Arti cial Intelligence and Users Personalities: A New Scenario for Human-Computer Interaction in Gaming Conference Paper October 2020 DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-60128-7_45 CITATIONS 7 READS 418 2 authors, including: Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Cyberpsychology View project Edutainment View project Barbara Caci Universit degli Studi di Palermo 38 PUBLICATIONS 837 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Khaldoon Dhou on 08 October 2020. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. The interplay between Arti cial Intelligence and users personalities: A new scenario for human-computer interaction in gaming Barbara Caci1 and Khaldoon Dhou2 1 University of Palermo, 2 Texas A&M University Central Texas Abstract. The latest business reports showed that Augmented Real- ity (AR) and Arti cial Intelligence (AI) are ranked among the top 10 strategic trends for 2018. For these reasons, in this paper, we provide an interdisciplinary focus on design and personality issues, trying to discuss the interplay between games with personality and Arti cial Intelligence. First, we describe taxonomy models on personality in games and empir- ical studies aimed at exploring personality traits of Pok emon GO users. Second, we explore virtual humans employed in investigating chess per- sonalities via simulating human chess players. In this research article, the term virtual human is used to describe a computer program that simulates a human in some aspects such as playing chess. The results of personality and gaming are sparse and mixed. It remains unclear whether personality traits would similarly predict adoption and usage in the context of AR mobile game. On the contrary, results about AI showed that virtual humans have characteristics similar to those of hu- mans and helped researchers explore existing patterns in societies. In our discussion, we try to evidence the importance of personality in gaming also considering that an increasing sale for these technologies is fore- casted in 2020 to be 21 times higher than in 2016 (from US $2.9 billion to US $61.3 billion; Superdata Research, 2017). Keywords: personality, Augmented Reality, gaming, virtual humans, chess, chess personality 1 Introduction In 2016 Nick Yee wrote on his blog on Quantic Foundry: Games are often stereotyped as escapist fantasies where people get to pretend to be something they re not. But what the data shows is that gamers play games that align with their personalities. In the same way that people select the news and media that reinforce their worldviews, gamers select the games that reinforce their identities. For example, gamers who are extraverted prefer more social and action-oriented games. Gamers who are more conscientious prefer games with long-term thinking and plan- ning. The games we play are a re ection, not an escape, from our own identities. In this sense, people play games not to pretend to be someone they re not, but to become more of who they really are . 2 Barbara Caci1 and Khaldoon Dhou2 These ideas are quite interesting when applied in today s highly com- petitive marketplace of gaming. Indeed, coping with shortening product life-cycles and an increasing number of failing gaming innovations, re- searchers need to quest on e cient strategies for understanding the in- terplay between users personality traits and gaming. Game developers are deeply involved in creating a new generation of games that cater to individual users. The aim is to adapt game content and automatically customize it to each player s personality and individual playstyle [8]. For companies, this game hyper-personalization means making games more fun by adjusting them to the taste of each player, so leading users to likely play more and more and spend more and more money. However, for mental health researchers, users may risk developing addictive be- haviors. Indeed, the latest version of the Diagnostic Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders [3] included game addictions in the Emerging Mea- sures and Models section [27]. In this paper, we provide an interdisciplinary focus on design and personality issues, trying to discuss the interplay between Arti cial In- telligence and users personalities. We report speci cally studies about Augmented Reality (AR) and Arti cial Intelligence (AI) games. Addi- tionally, we explore the technology of virtual humans programmed using AI techniques and show how they can help us investigate di erent issues that are personality-related and hard to examine otherwise. For this re- search, a virtual human can be thought of as a computer simulation that behaves like a human in some conditions. It is essential to note that the latest business reports showed that AR and AI are ranked in the top 10 strategic trends for 2018 [12]. Moreover, an increasing sale for these technologies is forecasted in 2020 to be 21 times higher than in 2016 (from US $2.9 billion to US $61.3 billion; Superdata Research, 2017). AR and AI gaming technologies are cutting-edge research areas for game developers that aim to create sophisticated games that can change and respond to player feedback, and in-game characters that can evolve the more you spend time with them [50]. For instance, the challenge for AR game developers is to assign users a more dynamic and autonomous role in their gaming experiences [41], so that people might assign the highest perceived value to this kind of games [42]. As well, AI research that developed arti cial agents able to handily beat a human being at the classic board game, just as IBM s DeepBlue system bested Russian grandmaster Garry Kasparov back in 1997, has accelerated in recent years [21]. 2 Personality in gaming: taxonomy models Studies framed under the human-computer interaction reported that per- sonality is a critical variable for understanding why and how people are immersed in playing games. Indeed, gaming is conscious behavior that requests players to act and make a decision, to feel a di erent kind of emotion, so scholars have hypothesized that gaming is impacted not only by situational constructs, but also by consistent constructs, such as per- sonality [26]. As de ned by Larsen and Buss [36] personality is a stable, HCI gaming applications: the role of personality 3 organized collection of psychological traits and processes in the human being that in uences his or her interactions with and modi cations to the psychological, social and physical environment surrounding them. Seminal works characterized the pro les of the players based on gam- ing archetypes. First, the model of Bartle [6] categorizes players into four types based on di erent motivations, in-game behaviors, and play styles: Achievers, Socializers, Explorers, and Killers. Achievers (10% of gamers) are driven by achievements such as, for instance, collecting as many points as possible and status. Thus, they show their friends how they are progressing, tend to collect badges, and put them on display. This is the type of person who responds particularly well to incentive schemes such as Air Miles, where every additional mile collected is an achievement in its own right. Socializers (80% of gamers) are driven by experiencing fun through the game interaction with other players. They collaborate to achieve bigger and better things than they could on their own. Explorers (10% of gamers) are moved by a curiosity for new things and the discovery of new secrets. Explorers appreciated repetitive tasks as long as they eventually unlock a new area of the game, or they de- liver some kind of Easter Egg (an Easter Egg is a small bonus within a game sometimes it s as simple as a little joke, whereas in other cases it might be a full extra video sequence regarding what has been accom- plished). Finally, Killers (1% of gamers) are similar to Achievers in the way that they get a thrill from gaining points and winning status too. However, they want to see other people lose. They re highly competitive, want to be the best at the game, and winning is what motivates them. Successively, Bateman and Boon [7] created another model that iden- ti es players into four types: Conqueror, Manager, Wanderer, and Par- ticipant, which they later expanded to seven categories: Seeker, Survivor, Daredevil, Mastermind, Conqueror, Socializer and Achiever. Seekers are driven by interest and curiosity; Survivors enjoy fear and terror; Dare- devils loves the thrill and risk-taking; Masterminds play usually puzzle games; Conquerors are moved by struggling against adversity and beat- ing other players; Socializers are similar to Bartle s classi cation and enjoy talking to and helping other gamers, and nally Achievers are mo- tivated by long-term achievements. In addition to player archetypes, researchers have also used the Five Factors Model [15] to de ne players behaviors [11, 13, 35, 53, 55]. Dif- ferently from the classi cations of Bartle [6] and Bateman & Boon [7], which are based on gameplay elements that the target group would nd engaging, classi cations based on FFM refer more to users traits of per- sonality. The Five Factors Model is a well-known psychological model de- scribing personality variations along ve dimensions, called the Big Five that are respectively named: Extraversion, Openness, Conscientiousness, Neuroticism, and Agreeableness. Extraversion refers to personality traits such as energy, assertiveness, and sociability. Openness regards the ten- dency to be informed, creative, insightful, curious, and to have a variety of experiences. Conscientiousness is related to the tendency to be self- disciplined, act dutifully, and aim for achievement. Neuroticism means a tendency to experience unpleasant emotions easily, such as anger, anx- iety, depression, or vulnerability. Agreeableness means the tendency to 4 Barbara Caci1 and Khaldoon Dhou2 be compassionate, trusting, and cooperative rather than suspicious and antagonistic towards others [39]. In sum, player type models are more speci c and focused at explaining di erences in player behavior, experi- ence, and emotions, whereas personality trait models can be seen as a higher-level conceptualization of individual di erences (not directed at certain areas or behaviors) [9]. 3 Personality in AR gaming: the case of Pok emon GO In this section, we report a case study about Pok emon GO. This game is a very particular AR game because it o ers a very unusual gaming expe- rience in the real setting. Gamers live a mix of real and virtual items that coexist together [33]. This exciting mix of game, sociality, and physical presence [37] is a novelty in the mobile AR game panorama and might be responsible for the worldwide di usion of the game [5]. Empirical studies aimed at analyzing users experience about this game have mainly framed the investigations about personality traits under the FFM [39] theoret- ically. However, the results are mixed and contradictory. On one hand, personality seems not to in uence playing Pok emon GO, as showed by Rasche et al. [44]. Authors, indeed, reported no signi cant di erences in personality traits such as extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness, neuroticism, and openness in three groups of Pok emon GO gamers (i.e., active users, former users, and non-users). On the other hand, person- ality traits such as extraversion and emotional stability seem to predict game habits, and the collection of a high number of Pok emon GO crea- tures and species, respectively [52]. As well, emotional stability predicts time usage, while openness is a positive predictor of the gamers level of expertise. On the contrary, conscientiousness and agreeableness are negative predictors both of the level of the gamers expertise and of the number of species they collect. In sum, players who are emotionally sta- ble, but less conscientious as well as those who are less cooperative and open to experience spend more time playing and become more experts in achieving higher levels in the game [52]. Similarly, Mattheis et al. [38] found that people who play Pok emon GO have a signi cantly lower score in conscientiousness than non-players. In contrast, no signi cant di erences between players and non-players have been found for extraversion, neuroticism, agreeableness, and open- ness. Personality traits such as introversion, low levels of agreeableness, and conscientiousness describe better Pok emon GO players. Introverted and low consciousness people spend more time in playing Pok emon GO but are people with low scores on agreeableness who have the highest numbers of daily game sessions [10]. The study by Lalot et al. [34] analyzed personality by the HEXACO model [4]. This model is quite similar to Big Five Model [39], but it introduces two more personality traits related to honesty and emotion- ality. Lalot et al. [34] performed a longitudinal study on a sample of Pok emon GO gamers recruited in English-speaking (i.e., the USA, the UK, Ireland, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand) and French-speaking HCI gaming applications: the role of personality 5 countries (e.g, France, Switzerland, Belgium, and Canada). The results of this two-phase longitudinal study showed that only agreeableness was a strong predictor of the motivations for starting to play. Perseverance, premeditation, and agreeableness were more likely to predict the inten- tion to continue playing Pok emon GO after four months. Other studies analyzed personality dimensions such as self-e cacy [32] and emotional intelligence [45]. However, self-e cacy has a non-signi cant e ect on attitude for playing Pok emon GO [32]. Di erently, emotional intelligence is a personality trait that characterizes Pok emon GO play- ers. Comparing with non-players, participants increased their scores at emotional intelligence measures after game sessions with Pok emon GO, and also had better social relationships with peers [45]. Some studies suggested that personality traits are deeply interconnected with motiva- tions for playing. For instance, Mattheis et al. [38] analyzed personality traits of people starting to play, continuing to play, and stopping to play three months later and found that people who quit the game scored higher in neuroticism than those who were still playing the game. No signi cant di erences between people who continued playing the game and those that have stopped playing have found. Results did not change when controlling for personal inattentiveness and time spending on play- ing. Caci et al. [10] evidenced that recreational needs mostly drive in- troverted gamers, while personal needs move less agreeable people and social needs low conscientiousness people. Khalis and Mikami [30] found that more extroverted, cooperative, and socially competent players are more engaged in the game, displaying more catching behavior during the gameplay sessions. Additionally, participants high on conscientiousness and social competence displayed more exploration behavior. Di erently, players with high levels of social anxiety have less catching behavior. 4 The employment of virtual humans to explore chess personalities: The case of chess games In this section, we present research studies about personalities and vir- tual chess players. Chess can play an important role in addressing the issue of exploring personalities over chessboards. An early work that ex- plored chess and personalities was o ered by Karpman [28], who showed chess as a ght between di erent personalities and how players can ar- ticulate their actual personalities in their chess games. That is to say, he showed how the life events of some chess players are emulated over the chessboard. Additionally, he compared well-known chess grandmasters and showed particular chess patterns and how they can contribute to chess arrangements. The ndings of Karpman [28] have been essential to future studies in exploring the personalities of chess players via the involvement of virtual humans that represent real chess players ranging from novice players to top-rank grandmasters. Recent research studies have been concerned with exploring the e ectiveness of virtual chess players and how they perform while competing against other players. A virtual chess player is de ned as a computer simulation that imitates a real player existing in 6 Barbara Caci1 and Khaldoon Dhou2 the chess community such as Kasparov and Polgar [19]. These players exist in di erent skills and playing styles, and they allow a chess trainer to play against various opponents to sharpen his skill. Each virtual chess player is characterized by a rating and a chess personality. Ratings are assigned by various organizations such as the World Chess Federation and the United States Chess Federation (USCF). The rating is a number that is assigned to each player to measure his skill and compare him against other players in the chess community. Chess personality is de ned as the style of the player while he competes against other players. For example, one of the virtual chess players is Anderssen, who simulates Adolf Anderssen (July 6, 1818 March 13, 1879). The simulation of Anderssen reveals a grandmaster who starts attacking his opponent and goes after his King at an early stage of the game. Another example is the simulation of Leko, who is a defensive and cautious grandmaster. The employment of virtual chess players made it possible to examine the competition between chess players who existed in di erent time eras. Interestingly, virtual humans have been attractive to medical researchers, as the involvement of software of virtual chess players has been used as a means of surgical training [48]. Virtual humans have emerged as powerful tools for understanding many aspects of the psychology of chess players. In a recent study, Dhou [19] explored the personalities of the grandmasters Anderssen and Leko while competing against less-skilled virtual players by utilizing vir- tual chess players. In his study, he used di erent metrics including the errors made by players and the number of moves in their chess games. A follow-up study was conducted to explore the psychology of competition between two groups of chess players: grandmasters and class-A play- ers [22]. While the grandmasters group involves Anderssen and Leko, who vary in their attack and defense attitudes, the class-A players group incorporates players who have di erent preferences to utilizing knights and bishops in their games. Research shows that knights and bishops de- pict various adjustments in business research and therefore, this makes it essential to investigate them [29]. Overall, the two studies [19, 22] con- sistently indicate that less skilled players tend to make more mistakes when they compete against a defensive grandmaster (i.e. Leko) as op- posed to an attacking grandmaster (i.e. Anderssen). Additionally, the two studies provide strong evidence for the e cacy of a grandmaster s style while competing against less-skilled players. More speci cally, a grandmaster with an attacking style tends to have fewer errors than a defensive grandmaster. The ndings are linked to the fact that people instinctively recognize the origins of problematic occurrences and how they can be in uenced by them [54]. A similar study in this area is the work explored the personality of Kasparov by using virtual humans to simulate Kasparov and three pro- posed opponents [21]. The importance of this work is that it o ers an understanding of Kasparov s personality, which has attracted much at- tention among psychologists and arti cial intelligence researchers. Kas- parov is known for being able to calculate quickly, employing original openings, and sacri cing with pieces to gain rapid advantage and al- low mobility. In the last few years, there has been a growing interest in HCI gaming applications: the role of personality 7 investigating the personality of Kasparov for many reasons. That is to say, there is evidence that the personality of Kasparov plays a crucial role in designing chess-playing programs [31, 51]. Additionally, recent re- search shows the psychology of competition between di erent opponents against Kasparov and the di erences in their performances according to their chess personalities [21]. Together the three studies in virtual chess humans [19, 21, 22] provide important insights into chess personalities and using them in analyzing chess outcomes. Overall, these studies high- light the need for more studies that link chess personalities to behavior in real-life scenarios and exploring the relationships between them. Such studies might also provide further insights into di erent aspects of busi- ness such as personalities at the workforce and di erent strategies within organizations such as aggression and defense. 5 Future studies in AR and AI gaming The existing studies on personality and the gaming are sparse at best, and the few results are often discordant, and cannot be used to de ne per- sonality traits [49]. Hence, it remains unclear whether personality traits would similarly predict adoption and usage in the context of AR mobile game. Similarly, other personality dimensions such as self-e cacy [32] and emotional intelligence [32] have been analyzed, but actually, there are very few studies in the context of AR mobile game for corroborating reported ndings. Moreover, scholars used, in prevalence, self-report mea- sures for the assessment of all the independent and dependent variables alternatively focused in the researches (e.g., personality, game habits). We have to remember that self-report measures are particularly a ected by social desirability bias [14], so the use of these types of measures might be a ected by participants disclosure of some sensitive information, and therefore, causing mixed results. Most of the studies examined are also cross-sectional and did not control for multiple comparisons, which ex- plicitly limit the possibility of establishing causal links between speci c personality traits and gaming technologies. In future investigations, it might be possible to utilize virtual chess humans in exploring new aspects in strategic management and competi- tive advertising. Further studies, which take di erent characteristics into account, will need to be undertaken. However, more research on this topic needs to be undertaken before the association between chess per- sonalities and terms in management and marketing is more clearly un- derstood. For instance, further investigations are needed to shed light on the personalities of virtual humans and how they can be mapped to busi- ness strategies. These investigations can probably help other researchers better understand how to conduct new experiments that utilize virtual humans to better investigate real business scenarios. However, to develop a full picture of virtual chess humans, additional studies will be needed that explore di erent personalities, investigate how the parameters over- lap, and how they lead to di erent outcomes. For example, recently, two studies investigated attack vs. defense in chess grandmasters and how it could in uence other less skilled players [19, 22]. Although these re- sults revealed interesting ndings, it is important to note that they only 8 Barbara Caci1 and Khaldoon Dhou2 explore two grandmasters and how they perform while competing with other players. We believe that we need to explore di erent types of at- tackers to be able to comprehend their behavior and understand the full picture before mapping it to other elds of research. 6 Conclusion This study has examined a versatile background on game design in- cluding personality issues, while discussing di erent models that classify players into distinct groups. In particular, we report studies in Pok emon GO and chess that are related to Augmented Reality (AR) and Arti - cial Intelligence (AI). On one hand, it evidences that personality may potentially a ect gameplay behaviors. Such results might be promising and useful for the personalization of games. We underline the possibility to use personality factors for planning new or adapting existing games to target audiences for improving the player experience and facilitating long-term engagement with the games. Moreover, because of the increas- ing tendency to develop gaming applications that use AR in combination with AI [43], the ndings of personality traits may also useful for devel- oping criteria for the clients segmentation in the marketplace of mobile technologies and applications. Designing, developing, and publishing a game is not a simple process, rather a considerable e ort. Although it is intriguing to use personality for game development, we need to be sure it can predict player experience. As follows, the evidence from this paper suggests that the employment of virtual humans can be used as a means to explore the personalities of players. As shown for chess, since this game symbolizes a war between two groups, we believe that this work can be eventually extended to investigate new patterns in business and marketing where competition between strategies exist. This research has thrown up many questions in need of further in- vestigation. First, it would be interesting to compare real players with particular personalities along with their equivalent virtual players. We believe that this can help to investigate a relationship between virtual humans and real players. Second, it will be essential to further explore the decision-making process under di erent time constraints between players with di erent personality traits or of di erent genders. Third, more studies can be conducted to investigate the relationship between actual personalities and chess personalities [1, 2, 46, 47]. Finally, further research can investigate relationships between bio-inspired behaviors and chess personalities [16, 18, 20, 23, 40]. These behaviors proved their e ec- tiveness in many elds including coding binary information utilized in many aspects such as visualization research [17, 24, 25]. References 1. Al-Samarraie, H., Sarsam, S.M., Alzahrani, A.I., Alalwan, N.: Per- sonality and individual di erences: the potential of using preferences HCI gaming applications: the role of personality 9 for visual stimuli to predict the big ve traits. Cognition, Technol- ogy & Work 20(3), 337 349 (Aug 2018), https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10111-018-0470-6 2. Al-Samarraie, H., Sarsam, S.M., Alzahrani, A.I., Alalwan, N., Ma- sood, M.: The role of personality characteristics in informing our preference for visual presentation: An eye movement study. Jour- nal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments 8(6), 709 719 (2016) 3. American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-5 ). American Psychiatric Pub (2013) 4. Ashton, M.C., Lee, K., Perugini, M., Szarota, P., De Vries, R.E., Di Blas, L., Boies, K., De Raad, B.: A six-factor structure of personality-descriptive adjectives: solutions from psycholexical stud- ies in seven languages. Journal of personality and social psychology 86(2), 356 366 (2004) 5. Baranowski, T.: Pok emon go, go, go, gone? Games for Health Journal 5(5), 293 294 (2016) 6. Bartle, R.: Hearts, clubs, diamonds, spades: Players who suit muds. Journal of MUD research 1(1), 19 (1996) 7. Bateman, C., Boon, R.: 21st Century Game Design (Game Develop- ment Series). Charles River Media, Inc., USA (2005) 8. Bertens, P., Guitart, A., Chen, P.P., Perianez, A.: A machine- learning item recommendation system for video games. In: 2018 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG). pp. 1 4 (2018) 9. Busch, C., Schulte-N olke, H., Wiewi orowska-Domagalska, A., Zoll, F.: The rise of the platform economy: a new challenge for eu con- sumer law? Journal of European Consumer and Market Law 5 (2016) 10. Caci, B., Scrima, F., Tabacchi, M.E., Cardaci, M.: The reciprocal in uences among motivation, personality traits, and game habits for playing pok emon go. International Journal of Human Computer Interaction 35(14), 1303 1311 (2018), https://doi.org/10.1080/ 10447318.2018.1519167 11. Canossa, A., Badler, J.B., El-Nasr, M.S., Tignor, S., Colvin, R.C.: In your face (t) impact of personality and context on gameplay be- havior. In: FDG (2015) 12. CeArley, D., Burke, B., Searle, S., Walker, M.J.: Top 10 strategic technology trends for 2018. The Top 10 (2016) 13. Chen, Z., El Nasr, M.S., Canossa, A., Badler, J., Tignor, S., Colvin, R.: Modeling individual di erences through frequent pattern mining on role-playing game actions. In: Eleventh Arti cial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment Conference (2015) 14. Corbetta, P.: Social Research: Theory, Methods and Techniques. SAGE Publications, Ltd (2003) 15. Costa, P.T., McCrae, R.R.: Neo personality inventory-revised (NEO PI-R). Psychological Assessment Resources Odessa, FL (1992) 16. Dhou, K., Cruzen, C.: An innovative chain coding technique for com- pression based on the concept of biological reproduction: An agent- based modeling approach. IEEE Internet of Things Journal pp. 1 1 (2019) 10 Barbara Caci1 and Khaldoon Dhou2 17. Dhou, K.: Toward a Better Understanding of Viewers Perceptions of Tag Clouds: Relative Size Judgment. Ph.D. thesis, USA (2013) 18. Dhou, K.: A novel agent-based modeling approach for image coding and lossless compression based on the wolf-sheep predation model. In: Computational Science ICCS 2018. pp. 117 128. Springer In- ternational Publishing, Cham (2018) 19. Dhou, K.: Towards a better understanding of chess players person- alities: A study using virtual chess players. In: Kurosu, M. (ed.) Human-Computer Interaction. Interaction Technologies. pp. 435 446. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2018) 20. Dhou, K.: An innovative design of a hybrid chain coding algorithm for bi-level image compression using an agent-based modeling ap- proach. Applied Soft Computing 79, 94 110 (2019), http://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1568494619301425 21. Dhou, K.: An innovative employment of virtual humans to explore the chess personalities of garry kasparov and other class-a players. In: Stephanidis, C. (ed.) HCI International 2019 Late Breaking Papers. pp. 306 319. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2019) 22. Dhou, K.: An exploration of chess personalities in grandmasters and class-A players using virtual humans. International Journal of Enter- tainment Technology and Management (2020), accepted (to appear) 23. Dhou, K.: A new chain coding mechanism for compression stimu- lated by a virtual environment of a predator prey ecosystem. Future Generation Computer Systems 102, 650 669 (2020), http://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167739X1832630X 24. Dhou, K., Hadzikadic, M., Faust, M.: Typeface size and weight and word location in uence on relative size judgments in tag clouds. Journal of Visual Languages & Computing 44, 97 105 (2018), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S1045926X16300210 25. Dhou, K.K., Kosara, R., Hadzikadic, M., Faust, M.: Size judgment and comparison in tag clouds. IEEE Visualization Poster Proceed- ings (2013) 26. Fang, X., Zhu, M.: Extraversion and computer game play: Who plays what games? In: Jacko, J.A. (ed.) Human-Computer Interaction. Users and Applications. pp. 659 667. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2011) 27. Gri ths, M., King, D., Demetrovics, Z.: Dsm-5 internet gaming dis- order needs a uni ed approach to assessment. Neuropsychiatry 4(1), 1 4 (2014) 28. Karpman, B.: The psychology of chess. Psychoanalytic Review 24(1), 54 69 (1937) 29. Ketola, T.: Corporate states or corporate citizens? chess between corporations, states and citizens with sustainable development at stake. International Journal of Sustainable Economy 3(1), 107 122 (2010) 30. Khalis, A., Mikami, A.Y.: Who s gotta catch em all?: Individual dif- ferences in pok`emon go gameplay behaviors. Personality and Indi- vidual Di erences 124, 35 38 (2018), http://www.sciencedirect. com/science/article/pii/S0191886917307067 HCI gaming applications: the role of personality 11 31. Khodarkovsky, M., Shamkovich, L., Kasparov, G.: New Era: How Garry Kasparov Changed the World of Chess. Ballantine Books, USA (1997) 32. Kim, H., Lee, H.J., Cho, H., Kim, E., Hwang, J.: Replacing self- e cacy in physical activity: unconscious intervention of the ar game, pok emon go. Sustainability 10(6), 1971 (2018) 33. Koo, C., Choi, K., Ham, J., Chung, N.: Empirical study about the pok emongo game and destination engagement. In: Stangl, B., Pesonen, J. (eds.) Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2018. pp. 16 28. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2018) 34. Lalot, F., Zerhouni, O., Pinelli, M.: I wanna be the very best! agreeableness and perseverance predict sustained playing to pok emon go: A longitudinal study. Games for Health Journal 6(5), 271 278 (2017), https://doi.org/10.1089/g4h.2017.0051, pMID: 28661725 35. van Lankveld, G., Schreurs, S., Spronck, P., van den Herik, J.: Ex- traversion in games. In: van den Herik, H.J., Iida, H., Plaat, A. (eds.) Computers and Games. pp. 263 275. Springer Berlin Heidel- berg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2011) 36. Larsen, R., Buss, D.M.: Personality Psychology: Domains of Knowl- edge About Human Nature. McGraw-Hill Publishing (2018) 37. Liszio, S., Masuch, M.: Designing shared virtual reality gaming expe- riences in local multi-platform games. In: Wallner, G., Kriglstein, S., Hlavacs, H., Malaka, R., Lugmayr, A., Yang, H.S. (eds.) Entertain- ment Computing - ICEC 2016. pp. 235 240. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2016) 38. Mattheiss, E., Hochleitner, C., Busch, M., Orji, R., Tscheligi, M.: De- constructing pok emon go an empirical study on player personality characteristics. In: de Vries, P.W., Oinas-Kukkonen, H., Siemons, L., Beerlage-de Jong, N., van Gemert-Pijnen, L. (eds.) Persuasive Tech- nology: Development and Implementation of Personalized Technolo- gies to Change Attitudes and Behaviors. pp. 83 94. Springer Inter- national Publishing, Cham (2017) 39. McCrae, R.R., Costa Jr, P.T.: A Five-Factor Theory of Personality, chap. Handbook of personality: Theory and research, pp. 139 153 (1999) 40. Mouring, M., Dhou, K., Hadzikadic, M.: A Novel Algorithm for Bi- Level Image Coding and Lossless Compression based on Virtual Ant Colonies. In: 3rd International Conference on Complexity, Future Information Systems and Risk. pp. 72 78. Set ubal - Portugal (2018) 41. Ostrom, A.L., Parasuraman, A., Bowen, D.E., Patr cio, L., Voss, C.A.: Service research priorities in a rapidly changing context. Jour- nal of Service Research 18(2), 127 159 (2015), https://doi.org/ 10.1177/1094670515576315 42. Patr cio, L., Fisk, R.P., e Cunha, J.F., Constantine, L.: Multilevel service design: From customer value constellation to service experi- ence blueprinting. Journal of Service Research 14(2), 180 200 (2011), https://doi.org/10.1177/1094670511401901 12 Barbara Caci1 and Khaldoon Dhou2 43. Porter, C.E., Donthu, N.: Using the technology acceptance model to explain how attitudes determine internet usage: The role of per- ceived access barriers and demographics. Journal of Business Re- search 59(9), 999 1007 (2006), http://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0148296306000993 44. Rasche, P., Schlomann, A., Mertens, A.: Who is still playing pok emon go? a web-based survey. JMIR Serious Games 5(2), e7 (Apr 2017), http://games.jmir.org/2017/2/e7/ 45. Ruiz-Ariza, A., Casuso, R.A., Suarez-Manzano, S., Mart nez-L opez, E.J.: E ect of augmented reality game pok emon go on cognitive per- formance and emotional intelligence in adolescent young. Computers & Education 116, 49 63 (2018), http://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0360131517302002 46. Sarsam, S.M., Al-Samarraie, H.: A rst look at the e ectiveness of personality dimensions in promoting users satisfaction with the system. SAGE Open 8(2), 2158244018769125 (2018), https://doi. org/10.1177/2158244018769125 47. Sarsam, S.M., Al-Samarraie, H.: Towards incorporating personal- ity into the design of an interface: a method for facilitating users interaction with the display. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 28(1), 75 96 (Mar 2018), https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11257-018-9201-1 48. Schlickum, M.K., Hedman, L., Enochsson, L., Kjellin, A., Fell ander- Tsai, L.: Systematic video game training in surgical novices im- proves performance in virtual reality endoscopic surgical simulators: A prospective randomized study. World Journal of Surgery 33(11), 2360 (Aug 2009), https://doi.org/10.1007/s00268-009-0151-y 49. Skippon, S., Garwood, M.: Responses to battery electric vehicles: UK consumer attitudes and attributions of symbolic meaning fol- lowing direct experience to reduce psychological distance. Trans- portation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 16(7), 525 531 (2011), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S1361920911000654 50. Statt, N.: How arti cial intelligence will revolutionize the way video games are developed and played. The Verge (2019), online from https://www.theverge.com/2019/3/6/18222203/video- game-ai-future-procedural-generation-deep-learning 51. Sverzellati, N., Brillet, P.Y.: When deep blue rst defeated kasparov: is a machine stronger than a radiologist at predicting prognosis in idiopathic pulmonary brosis? European Respiratory Journal 49(1) (2017), https://erj.ersjournals.com/content/49/1/1602144 52. Tabacchi, M.E., Caci, B., Cardaci, M., Perticone, V.: Early usage of pok emon go and its personality correlates. Computers in Hu- man Behavior 72, 163 169 (2017), http://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0747563217301280 53. Van Lankveld, G., Schreurs, S., Spronck, P.: Psychologically veri ed player modelling. In: 10th Int. Conf. Intell. Games Simulation (2009) 54. Wise, D.M., Rosqvist, J.: Explanatory style and well-being. Compre- hensive handbook of personality and psychopathology p. 285 (2006) HCI gaming applications: the role of personality 13 55. Yee, N., Ducheneaut, N., Nelson, L., Likarish, P.: Introverted elves & conscientious gnomes: The expression of personality in world of warcraft. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu- man Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 753 762. CHI 11, As- sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2011), https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979052 View publication stats