See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/338979472 Analyzing emotion based movie recommender system using fuzzy emotion features Article in International Journal of Information Technology February 2020 DOI: 10.1007/s41870-020-00431-x CITATIONS 15 READS 1,485 3 authors, including: Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Emotion based trust networks, recommender systems and NLP View project Enhancing the quality of E-Learning and E-Governance systems View project Mala Saraswat ABES Engineering College 27 PUBLICATIONS 84 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Atreya Kala Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology 1 PUBLICATION 15 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Mala Saraswat on 24 May 2021. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. ORIGINAL RESEARCH Analyzing emotion based movie recommender system using fuzzy emotion features Mala Saraswat1,2 Shampa Chakraverty1 Atreya Kala1 Received: 25 March 2019 / Accepted: 22 January 2020  Bharati Vidyapeeth s Institute of Computer Applications and Management 2020 Abstract User generated contents like reviews and com- ments contain both the information about a given product and also the opinions asserted by the user. With the surge in internet usage, there is a cascade of user generated data such a reviews and comments. People share their experi- ences, opinions, sentiments and emotions by writing reviews and comments for products they purchase online or after watching a movie, reading books etc. These user generated data contains emotion lexicons such as happi- ness, sadness, and surprise. Analysis of such emotion can provide a new aspect for recommending new items based on their emotional preferences. In this work, we extract the emotions from this user generated data using the lexical ontology, WordNet and information from the domain of psychology. These extracted emotions can be used for recommendations. Evaluation on emotion prediction fur- ther veri es the effectiveness of the proposed model in comparison to traditional rating based item similarity model. We further compare this with fuzziness in emotion features. Keywords Collaborative recommender system  Content based recommender system  Emotion analysis  WorldNet 1 Introduction Recommender system study patterns of activities of users, analyzes it and then anticipate their preferences among a set of items. Recommender system uses technology that can broadly be classi ed into two categories: content and collaborative ltering. Content based model (CBR) works by analyzing and examining properties about the items to make predictions. Collaborative model (CF) nds similar- ity of users or items to make predictions about what a user may like. CF approaches utilize the wisdom of crowds to recommend items according to the preferences of users with similar tastes and preferences [1]. Among these, tra- ditional memory-based CF techniques nd similar users based on their ratings for different items. These similar users form the basis of user based recommender system. Model-based CF approach analyzes the rating pattern to precompute a model to recommend items. Based on fea- tures and content of the items liked by the items, CBR systems nds similar items with same features or attributes to recommend new items [2]. Both CF and CBR approa- ches suffer some limitations. CF based recommender sys- tems typically encounter the problems of (1) sparse rating as many users don t rate items and (2) cold start problem. Cold start problem is of two types: new user cold start problem and new item cold start problem. New user cold start problem occurs when a new use who has not rated any item enters a recommender system. New item cold start problem occurs when a new item that is not rated by other users is added to the system. On the other hand CBR only suffers from new user problem where there is no infor- mation about his like/dislike. Due to these limitation both CF and CBR fail to generate reliable recommendations [1]. Due to sparse user-item rating matrices nearest neighbors & Mala Saraswat malasaraswat@gmail.com Shampa Chakraverty nsit.apmahs@gmail.com Atreya Kala atreya_kala@yahoo.in 1 Department of Computer Engineering, NSUT, Delhi, India 2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, ABES Engineering College, Ghaziabad, India 123 Int. j. inf. tecnol. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41870-020-00431-x or nearest items are dif cult to identify. This leads to poor recommendations [3]. In this paper we propose a new item based recommender system using both CF and CBF based approaches to rec- ommend items using emotions. With advent of Web 2.0, users express their interests and tastes through feedbacks, reviews, comments etc., in social media. Many E-com- merce sites store these feedbacks from multiple domains and try to suggest items from various domains that users may likely to be interested in for better recommendations. Emotions are intense feeling that are directed by some- thing s or someone. Reviews and comments of an item act as a content from which emotions are extracted. These emotions act as link to generate item item similarity. Then using item based collaborative ltering recommendations are performed. We compared our approach with other approaches that used item item similarity using cosine based and conditional probability based similarity. 2 Related work Traditional approaches for recommender systems utilizes content of items, demographic information of users or user- item rating for building recommender systems [4 6]. User based CF recommender systems uses user ratings for items to nd similar users that like/dislike similar items.in the past. It then analyzes the neighborhood to recommend new items to a new user. The major limitation of this user based recommender system is that in many cases it is dif cult to nd neighbors due to lack of user-item rating. Second problem is related to scalability. With increase in number of users and items, the computations grow linearly, increasing the complexity and time for recommendation. Item-based recommendation approach computes similarity between the items for recommendations. In this approach, relation or similarity between the items are identi ed such as purchasing history or ratings given to the items. If a user likes and so purchases an item, she may often purchase another similar item [4, 7]. With the advent of Web 2.0, social networks and user- contributed information have become important sources of information that have largely contributed to recommender systems especially in e-commerce sites. Shi [8] in her paper surveys different sources of side information like reviews and comments that are freely written text, multi- media content, tags, geotag, that stretch beyond the rating matrix to remove sparsity. In many research areas, emotion is a signi cant con- textual factor in a variety of personalized and adaptive systems such as searching results [9], modeling user behavior [10], opinion mining and sentiment analysis [11], and information access and retrieval [12]. Emotions are widely being used in recommender system nowadays. In [12] movies are recommended to users by analyzing and modeling the user s mood. Kaminskas and Ricci [13] in their work recommend music for as user as he/she visits places of interest. The social tags acts as a link that represent the user s emotional state. Geneva Emotional Music Scale (GEMS) model is used to attach emotion tags based on social tag to music. Baldoni et al. [14], in his work also uses emotions from item annotations in social tagging systems. In our work, we used the approach as in [15] for automatic analysis of emotions from user gener- ated text. In our work we used reviews of items to compile, emotion lexicon using Parrott s 2001 categorization of emotions from eld of psychology [16] and WordNet [17]. A set of basic emotions are extracted from reviews thus building the emotion pro le of items. This emotion pro le act as a link for nding similar items with similar emotion pro le. Then CF based approach is used for recommendations. 3 Emotion analysis of reviews This section discusses how to extract various emotions that are expressed in user generated text gathered from reviews from the movie domain. Based on what users write in reviews after watching a movie, emotion pro les of all movies are created. 3.1 Compiling emotion lexicon Emotions are de ned as a mental state that arises spon- taneously rather than through conscious effort and is often accompanied by physiological changes [18]. For analysis of emotion extracted from user generated content, we used the emotion lexicons using WorldNet as compiled in work [15]. In this work the knowledge from eld of psychology, Parrott s 2001 categorization of emotions (which catego- rizes basic emotions as primary, secondary and tertiary in a hierarchical organization) is used. In the rst step lexicon corresponding to six basic emotions i.e., love, anger, fear, joy, sadness and surprise is build. The corresponding pri- mary, secondary and tertiary emotions keywords and their synonyms from WorldNet are added to their respective lexicons and are assigned different weights. For emotion Ek, the weight for a keyword kw is represented by EmW (kw,k). The compiled emotion lexicon contains in all a total of 1377 keywords as mentioned in the paper [15]. 3.2 Preprocessing of source It is very important to preprocess the corpus containing reviews and comments from the two sources to extract Int. j. inf. tecnol. 123 appropriate content and lter out the inappropriate. Due to unpredictability of people writing reviews and comments after watching a movie or reading a book, reviewers may write words having mixed casing. Hence in rst step reviews/comments are tokenized, and then converted to lower case so that irrespective of their casing, all match to their corresponding emotion. Stemming is performed to reduce the tokens to their root word like happier , hap- pily , happiness to root word happy . 3.3 Emotion pro ling of movie based on reviews The emotion pro le of any movie represents the cumula- tive strength of every emotion as computed by the emotion pro ling of all the available reviews of a movie. The complete procedure for the emotion pro ling is described as follows: A given review R may convey one or more emotions. For this task, a previously compiled emotion lexicon is utilized that broadly categorizes into six basic emotions joy, sadness, fear, anger, surprise and love [15] Let EK represent an emotion of category k, where k[{1.0.6} rep- resenting the six basic emotions. A review re ects a camou age of emotions. In the beginning, the emotion strengths for all six emotions are initialized to zero. Each word of the review acts as a tokenx. As review is read one token a time, x is matched with the lexicons of each of the six emotion categories. If x is found in Lexicon (EK), the value of emotion strength for emotion EK is incremented by the token s corresponding emotion weight EmW(x,k). After reading and processing all tokens of the review, the emotion strengths of each of the emotions will indicate the emotion pro le of the review. Thus emotion pro le of movie l is El={E1, E2, E3, E4, E5, E6}. 4 Items based Top N recommendation Finding similar items is the most important step in item based Top N recommendation model. 4.1 Measuring similarity between items 4.1.1 Rating based item similarity In this approach the similarity between two items is com- puted using cosine based similarity of the rated items x and y. Each item is represented as a vector in the user space where the vector contains the set of ratings of an item given by different users. Then the cosine similarity is computed between these vectors [7]. Formally, if R is n 9 m user- item matrix where n is number of users and m is the number of items, then the similarity between two items xi and yi is de ned as the cosine of the n dimensional vectors corresponding to the xi and yi column of matrix R where i is the common user. The similarity between these vectors is given by: CosSim x; y P i xiyi P i x2 i p P i y2 i p 1 From Eq. (1), it is clear that if two items are rated similarly by different users, the items are similar. This basically shows that similarity between two movies will be higher if each user that like one movie (hence rated it higher) also likes other movie. 4.1.2 Emotion based item similarity After generating the emotion pro le of an item, the simi- larity between the two items is computed using Kullback Leibler Divergence (KLD). KLD also known as the rel- ative entropy is a measure of how different two probability distributions are from each other [19]. The smaller the relative entropy, the more similar the distribution of emo- tions of two different items . But in our approach degree of similarity between two pro les must be symmetric. We therefore use the symmetric KLD divergence [20] which is computed as: KL P; Q X P i  Q i ln p i Q i   2 The lesser the divergence between two items, the more similar they are. So for each item we sort the items in ascending order to nd Top N most similar items. 4.2 Generating recommendations For each user who like a set of I items. For each item c candidate item in I, Top N items similar to c are added in the basket with their computed similarities to candidate item c. Then based on the computed similarity, items from the basket are sorted in non-increasing order and rst N items are recommended for Top N recommendation [7]. 5 Fuzzy emotion features As discussed in last section, the use of different emotion features can be used for nding items with similar emotion features for recommendations. However, there is a certain degree of vagueness and blurring boundaries between the lexicons of these categorical emotion features. Rusell [21] asserted that each emotion word, can be considered a label for a fuzzy set, de ned as a class without sharp boundaries in which there is gradual but speci able tran- sition from membership to non-membership . Such an Int. j. inf. tecnol. 123 observation for emotion bearing words is consistent with the view that fuzziness is characteristic of natural language categories [22]. Thus each emotion state has a value specifying with it a grade of membership in each fuzzy set that corresponds to an emotion label. Zadeh proposed fuzzy logic as extension of classical set theory to model real world problems in a realistic manner [23]. Saraswat et al. [24] in their work exploited the inherent vagueness in emotional features for recommendation using fuzzy emotion features for movie domain. Here we take each emotion category as a linguistic variable and compare taking emotion as fuzzy feature with our approach. 6 Experiments and results This section evaluates the performance of emotion based recommender system with rating based cosine item simi- larity. We then also compute the accuracy using Fuzzy emotion category for Top 10 recommendations using dif- ferent Models such as Gaussian, Trapezoid and Triangle. 6.1 Data sets In our experiments we conduct experiments using movies real work datasets from1 MovieLens. We exploit the MovieLens 100 K version of the dataset for our experi- ments consisting of 943 users and 1581 items. It already has active users who have rated more than 20 movies and frequently reviewed movies. All review les from Movie- lens are pre-processed using the Python Natural Language Toolkit. 6.2 Experimental design and metrics The goal of our experiments is to evaluate the performance of the emotion based top-N recommendations and compare with rating based cosine item similarity. The Movielens dataset is split into a training and test set. One of nonzero entry of each row that means (that user has not rated) to be part of test set and the training set consists of other remaining non-zero entry. We then evaluate the quality of the top-N recommendations. Items that are rated more than 3 by a user are assumed as being liked by the user. For each user using the items present in the training set as the basket, we obtained the top-N recommendations. The training set is used to build similarity model. The experimental analysis comparing rating based cosine similarity and emotion based item similarity is presented in the Table 1. Prediction accuracy is compared for the given approaches in Table 1 for top ten recommendations. It depicts that prediction accuracy of emotion based Top N recommendation algorithm is far better than cosine based item to item similarity recom- mendation. This indicates that emotion extracted from reviews and comments act as an important feature for recommendation. Table 2 shows the variation of prediction accuracy with increase in number of recommendation. As N increases, there is slight decrease in accuracy whereas for emotion based item similarity prediction accuracy slightly increases. This is because as N increases as item list have common items. Results are depicted graphically in Fig. 1. 6.3 Results using fuzzy emotion features We have also conducted experiments for showing predic- tion accuracy using fuzzy emotion features. Since the emotion lexicon set contains overlapping words such as shock is present in lexicon of both anger and fear, we use fuzzy set theory proposed by Zadeh [25]. We used the R package frbs V3.1-0 [26] available in CRAN repository to implement Wang and Mendel s technique for generating fuzzy rules [27]. Movies who are given ratings Table 1 Prediction accuracy for Top 10 recommendations Rating based Cosine item similarity Emotion based item similarity Accuracy 0.289 0.612 Table 2 Prediction accuracy for Top N recommendations Rating based Cosine item similarity Emotion based item similarity Top 10 0.289 0.612 Top 15 0.268 0.631 Top 20 0.250 0.653 Top 25 0.246 0.671 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 Top 10 Top 15 Top 20 Top 25 Accuracy Top N Recommendaons Performance Rang based Emoon Based Fig. 1 Prediction accuracy for Top N recommendations 1 MovieLens Dataset: http://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/. Int. j. inf. tecnol. 123 greater than 3 are assumed to be liked by the user and movies with ratings 1 and 2 are disliked by user. We do not consider ambiguous 3 rating. Zadeh implication generated 42 fuzzy rules for classifying each movie as liked or dis- liked based on its emotion content. Two of the rules gen- erated based on three linguistic variable i.e., small , medium and large are shown below. Rule 1 IF love is small and joy is small and surprise is small and anger is small and sad is large and fear is small THEN class is 1 Rule 2 IF love is medium and joy is medium and surprise is small and anger is small and sad is small and fear is small THEN class is 2. Table 3 depicts the performance of fuzzy emotion features using different Models like Guassian, Trapezoid and Triangle using various Linguistic variable for Top 10 recommendations. The experimental results as shown in Table 4 compares rating based and emotion based item similarity with Guassian based fuzzy emotion features. As depicted in Table 4, prediction accuracy decreases from 0.612 to 0.51 (using Guassian Model) for Top 10 recommendations. But using fuzzy emotion features, prediction accuracy is better than rating based cosine item similarity. For top-N recommendations prediction accuracy decreases with fuzzy emotion features but is better than rating based similarity 7 Conclusions This paper, presents and analyses top N recommendation model based on emotion analysis of the reviews of the item. We compared our emotion based method with rating based cosine item to item similarity model. Our results show that emotion based item similarity provide more accurate recommendation than rating based cosine item similarity. In future we will use emotions as a link between domains for cross domain recommendation system. We then using fuzzy rule based framework based on Mam- dani s model using Wang and Mendel learning technique to generate the fuzzy IF Then rules from the training data. Results conclude that fuzzy emotion features do not increase the prediction accuracy as compared to discrete emotion features. For future work, algorithms can be for- mulated to extract emotions of items from different sources and also propose new approaches for recommendations. References 1. Adomavicius G, Tuzhilin A (2005) Toward the next generation of recommender systems: a survey of the state-of-the-art and pos- sible extensions. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 6:734 749 2. Pazzani MJ, Billsus D (2007) Content-based recommendation systems. In: Brusilovski P, Kobsa A, Nejdl W (eds) The adaptive web. Springer, Berlin, pp 325 341 3. Schafer JB, Frankowski D, Herlocker J, Sen S (2007) Collabo- rative ltering recommender systems. In: Brusilovski P, Kobsa A, Nejdl W (eds) The adaptive web. Springer, Berlin, pp 291 324 4. Billsus D, Pazzani MJ (1998) Learning collaborative information lters. Icml 98:46 54 5. Basu C, Hirsh H, Cohen W (1998) Recommendation as classi - cation: using social and content-based information in recom- mendation. In: Proceedings of the fteenth national conference on arti cial intelligence. AAAI Press, pp 714 720 6. Konstan JA, Miller BN, Maltz D, Herlocker JL, Gordon LR, Riedl J (1997) GroupLens: applying collaborative ltering to Usenet news. Commun ACM 40(3):77 87 7. Karypis G (2001) Evaluation of item-based top-N recommenda- tion algorithms. In: Proceedings of the tenth international con- ference on Information and knowledge management, ACM, pp 247 254 8. Shi Y, Larson M, Hanjalic A (2014) Collaborative ltering beyond the user-item matrix: a survey of the state of the art and future challenges. ACM Comput Surveys (CSUR) 47(1):3 9. Meyers OC (2007) A mood-based music classi cation and exploration system. Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts institute of technology 10. Hastings J, Ceusters W, Smith B, Mulligan K (2011) The emotion ontology: enabling interdisciplinary research in the affective sciences. In: 7th international and interdisciplinary conference on modeling and using context, pp 119 123 11. de Albornoz JC, Plaza L, Gerva s P (2010) A hybrid approach to emotional sentence polarity and intensity classi cation. In: 14th international conference on computational natural language learning, pp 153 161 Table 3 Impact of fuzzy emotion features on movie recommender system Model MF Accuracy Fuzzy Model #Linguistic Variable = 3 Gaussian 0.48 Trapezoid 0.49 Triangle 0.49 Fuzzy Model #Linguistic Variable = 5 Gaussian 0.51 Trapezoid 0.49 Triangle 0.49 Fuzzy Model #Linguistic Variable = 7 Gaussian 0.48 Trapezoid 0.49 Triangle 0.49 Table 4 Comparison of Guassian based fuzzy emotion features with rating based and emotion based movie recommender system Rating based Cosine item similarity Emotion based item similarity Gaussian fuzzy emotion features Top 10 0.289 0.612 0.510 Top 15 0.268 0.631 0.513 Top 20 0.250 0.653 0.541 Top 25 0.246 0.671 0.551 Int. j. inf. tecnol. 123 12. Shi Y, Larson M, Hanjalic A (2010) Mining mood-speci c movie similarity with matrix factorization for context-aware recom- mendation. In: Proceedings of the workshop on context-aware movie recommendation, ACM, pp 34 40 13. Kaminskas M, Ricci F (2011) Location-adapted music recom- mendation using tags. In: International conference on user mod- eling, adaptation, and personalization, Springer, Berlin, pp 183 194 14. Baldoni M, Baroglio C, Patti V, Rena P (2012) From tags to emotions: ontology-driven sentiment analysis in the social semantic web. Intelligenza Arti ciale 6(1):41 54 15. Chakraverty S, Sharma S, Bhalla I (2015) Emotion location mapping and analysis using twitter. J Inf Knowl Manag 14(03):1550022 16. Handel S (2011) Classi cation of emotions. http://www.theemo tionmachine.com/classi cation-of-Emotions.Accessed Oct 2016 17. Miller GA (1995) WordNet: a lexical database for English. Commun ACM 38(11):39 41 18. TenHouten WD (2014) Emotion and reason: mind, brain, and the social domains of work and love. Routledge, London 19. Kullback S, Leibler RA (1951) On information and suf ciency. Ann Math Stat 22:79 86. https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/ 1177729694 20. Johnson DH, Sinanovic S (2001) Symmetrizing the Kullback Leibler distance. Technical Report, Rice University 21. Russel JA (1980) circum ex. J Pers Soc Psychol 39:1161 1178. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0077714 22. Labov W (1973) The boundaries of words and their meanings. New ways of analyzing variation in English 23. Zadeh LA (1965) Fuzzy sets. Inf Control 8(3):338 353 24. Saraswat M, Chakraverty S (2017) Leveraging movie recom- mendation using fuzzy emotion features. In: International con- ference on recent developments in science, engineering and technology, Springer, Singapore, pp 475 483 25. Zadeh LA (1975) The concept of a linguistic variable and its application to approximate reasoning I. Inf Sci 8(3):199 249 26. Riza LS, Bergmeir CN, Herrera F, Snchez JB (2015) Fuzzy rule- based systems for classi cation and regression in R. American Statistical Association, Washington 27. Wang L-X, Mendel JM (1992) Generating fuzzy rules by learning from examples. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern 22(6):1414 1427 Int. j. inf. tecnol. 123 View publication stats