Received October 24, 2017, accepted November 19, 2017, date of publication December 6, 2017, date of current version February 14, 2018. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2780087 Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud in a Distributed Computing Environment HESHAM EL-SAYED 1, SHARMI SANKAR2, MUKESH PRASAD 3, DEEPAK PUTHAL4, AKSHANSH GUPTA5, MANORANJAN MOHANTY6, AND CHIN-TENG LIN3, (Fellow, IEEE) 1College of Information Technology, UAE University, Al Ain 15551, United Arab Emirates 2Department of Information Technology, Ibri College of Applied Sciences (MoHE), Ibri 14, Oman 3Centre of Arti cal Intelligence, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia 4School of Electrical and Data Engineering, FEIT, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia 5School of Computer and Systems Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 110067, India 6Center of Cyber Security, New York University, Abu Dhabi 129188, United Arab Emirates Corresponding author: Hesham El-Sayed (helsayed@uaeu.ac.ae) ABSTRACT A centralized infrastructure system carries out existing data analytics and decision-making processes from our current highly virtualized platform of wireless networks and the Internet of Things (IoT) applications. There is a high possibility that these existing methods will encounter more challenges and issues in relation to network dynamics, resulting in a high overhead in the network response time, leading to latency and traf c. In order to avoid these problems in the network and achieve an optimum level of resource utilization, a new paradigm called edge computing (EC) is proposed to pave the way for the evolution of new age applications and services. With the integration of EC, the processing capabilities are pushed to the edge of network devices such as smart phones, sensor nodes, wearables, and on-board units, where data analytics and knowledge generation are performed which removes the necessity for a centralized system. Many IoT applications, such as smart cities, the smart grid, smart traf c lights, and smart vehicles, are rapidly upgrading their applications with EC, signi cantly improving response time as well as conserving network resources. Irrespective of the fact that EC shifts the workload from a centralized cloud to the edge, the analogy between EC and the cloud pertaining to factors such as resource management and computation optimization are still open to research studies. Hence, this paper aims to validate the ef ciency and resourcefulness of EC. We extensively survey the edge systems and present a comparative study of cloud computing systems. After analyzing the different network properties in the system, the results show that EC systems perform better than cloud computing systems. Finally, the research challenges in implementing an EC system and future research directions are discussed. INDEX TERMS IoT, cloud computing, edge computing, fog computing, multi-cloud. I. INTRODUCTION Edge computing (EC) is the new paradigm for a myriad of mission-critical applications.EC has carved a niche in the technological world due to its tremendous performing capabilities of providing real-time data analysis, low oper- ational cost, high scalability, reduced latency and improved quality of service (QoS). Owing to its phenomenal process- ing abilities, EC will revolutionize various domains such as healthcare, education, transportation, e-commerce and social networks. According to the survey results from Gartner Inc., it is predicted that there will be more than 20 billion networked or connected IoT devices by 2020 [1]. Additionally, McKinsey Global Institute has estimated that the total economic impact ofIoT and EC devices will reach $11 trillion by 2025 [2]. In recent years, on-demand services with EChavehit the market with giants like Amazon (Echo Dot) [3], Google (Nest) [4], Apple (Smart watch) [5], Cisco (IoxDevnet) [6], GE (Predix) [7], Itron (Open Way Riva) [8] and many more, all vying to be the next big computing revolution in the forefront of technology innovation. EC follows a decentralized architecture with data pro- cessing at the edge of the frontier network nodes to make 1706 2169-3536 2017 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. VOLUME 6, 2018 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud autonomous decisions. Therefore, the applications running on EC will perform actions locally before connecting to the cloud, thus reducing network overhead issues as well as the security and privacy issues. Furthermore, ECcan eas- ily be integrated with other wireless networks like mobile ad-hoc networks (MANETs), vehicular ad-hoc networks (VANETs), intelligent transport systems (ITSs) and the Inter- net of Things (IoT) to mitigate network-related and compu- tational problems. When integrated with EC, these network applications make decisions very quickly, avoiding any delay involved in life saving events. For example, in the healthcare domain, ambulance services enabled with EC are inbuilt with predictive algorithms that can make decisions autonomously without relying on the cloud. In relation to transportation applications, end devices such as smartphones and on-board units when upgraded with EC can quickly predict time-critical events and make decisions that can avoid accidents and traf c congestion, as shown in Figure 1. In e-commerce and social networking domains, EC can potentially enhance the user experience by providing a personalized recommendation system, easy navigation and advanced interactive browsing. FIGURE 1. EC in VANETs. The need for the phenomenal computing resource for pro- cessing and storing has integrated the vehicular ad hoc net- works (VANETs) to cloud. The promising features of novel upcoming edge paradigms were able to deliver an ef cient aggregation of sensor information, lter and process with less latency/jitter and high availability/scalability features paved way for the integration of VANETs with edge. This paper, emphasizes that the remedy for cloud computing paradigm is the upcoming edge paradigm. Even though EC has signi cantly more advantages when compared with cloud services, it cannot completely replace the cloud. As the analytical model is pushed to the edge of the network to take quick action, some applications still require support from the cloud or a centralized server, resulting in a globalized aggregated result. Futhermore, ECfacessev- eral minor challenges in managing network con gurations, integrating different wireless networks and IoT applications. These include improper resource management and inaccurate recon guration which requires intervention to suitably struc- ture and methodize the system. The scalability property of EC should be redesigned so that it can accommodateand increase the overall processing load. In order to address these chal- lenges, a reliable EC service should be designed dynamically to cope with the network requirements and its applications. Currently, conventional approaches to EC services seldom focus on scalability, robustness, ef ciency, manageability and dynamicity in their applications. The existing literature sur- veys on EConly focus on the computation and architecture of the technique; they do not analyze the performance of EC. A survey on software-de ned networking in collaboration with EC and its application isdiscussed in [9]. An overview of mobile edge networks and its computing and communication capabilities is given in [10]. There are other surveys which discuss the architecture of EC in [11] [13]; however, they address only the standardization and challenges in EC and no survey speci cally addresses the performance of EC with other services like cloud or centralized data centers. With this motivation, the rst section of our research addresses the challenges facing ECover different network applications and then performance analysis is conductedto demonstrate the ef ciency of edge systems. We extensively study the existing EC services and classify them based on their network applications. Various scenarios are devised for different network applications like MANETs, VANETs and the IoT and the results are compared with cloud computing services. The research goes a step further and identi esthe dynamic properties of EC with various network applications and future research directions are also highlighted. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents an extended survey of EC with different network applications. Section 3 discusses the existing literature on this area of research. Section 4 discusses the integration of the IoT with edges.Section 5 overviews the paper. Section 6highlights the issues and future research directions. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 7. II. OVERVIEW OF EDGE COMPUTING With innovative advancements in information and telecom- munications technology, the IoT has evolved to a remarkable degree over the last two decades. The rising demands of users as well as the high data rate generated by the IoT nodes have soared to trillions of gigabytes. This could potentially cause high latency issues and heavy bandwidth utilization. As traditional cloud servers cannot handle this huge amount of data with their centralized network architectures, there is a demand for a more optimized computation management technology in relation to real-time IoT applications. Thus, the need for ECis inevitable as itare designed to remove VOLUME 6, 2018 1707 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud the barriers of a centralized architecture, pushing comput- ing capabilities to the edge of the network. Though EC is viewed as a promising technology, the research on EC is still in its infancy. In order to design an ef cient EC system architecture, the performance of EC and its limitations need be considered Hence, we highlight some of the potential challenges facing EC and elucidate solutions to overcome these challenges. A. CHALLENGES FACING EC This section discusses some of the primary challenges that need to be consideredwhen designing an EC architecture. The selection of an EC device is critical in different network scenarios. For example, in VANETs, the EC device can be a vehicle or a dedicated edge server. If the vehicles are selected as edge devices, the computation gets distributed but the implementation cost will be high. On the other hand, if the network has a dedicated edge server, it may face challenges in handling the growing demands of the end devices. Thus, to have an effec- tive EC system, the application should incorporate an effective resource management scheme that should be pro cient enough to manage both the edge servers and the connecting devices. Computation of oading among edge devices is yet another challenging parameter. In a dynamic network, the computations across several edge nodes need to be of oaded in a distributed manner. Without a distributed scheme, the workload becomes biased which eventually increases the load in some systems and drains their battery. Careful policy making combined with effective computation orchestration and management is required to have an energy ef cient workload distribution system. Automated task allocation between the cloud and the edge is challenging. Due to certain technological con- straints in the computation and storage aspect, EC does not entirely exclude cloud computing services, as some computations are still carried out in cloud servers to increase system reliability. A reliable task scheduling scheme needs to be incorporated in the EC which should appropriately allocate tasks to the edge and cloud servers without affecting system performance. Reducing communication overhead to achieve QoS in EC is challenging. Without any network standardization and protocols, EC systems may suffer from network related problems, like network traf c congestion and denial of service. An ef cient network protocol and standards need to be designed for EC systems to ensure smooth operation without any network lag. Mobility management in EC is challenging. The devices utilized in high mobility networks like MANETs and VANETs will face frequent communication disconnec- tion. As a result, data processing and decision making could be signi cantly affected and delayed. A reli- able cooperation scheme should be incorporated in EC devices to effectively handle such mobility issues. Ensuring security and privacy in an EC system is also quite challenging. With computations pushed to the edge of the network, information becomes vulnerable to var- ious security threats and attacks. Ef cient pseudonym schemes and trust management systems need to be incor- porated in the system to handle security issues and thwart possible malicious intrusions/attacks. As a result, when designing an EC system for a network, researchers and vendor practitioners should consider these aforementioned challenges to achieve the enduring scalabil- ity and robustness of the system. As the requirements and challenges are different for every network, such as MANETs, VANETs and the IoT, the design of EC needs to be tai- lored to individual requirements. We analyse EC services and highlighted some of the important topographies that need to be considered while designing/implementing a new edge architecture.as shown in Figure 2. FIGURE 2. EC topographies. There are many papers that discuss the issues and chal- lenges in EC [31] [33], but there is no research which ana- lyzes the performance of EC with respect to the highlighted challenges. With this motivation, we rst present a liter- ature survey on EC in different networks. Based on our literature survey, the performance of the EC is analyzedin relation to the different challenges encountered. Speci cally, the selection of appropriate ECdevices and optimized com- putation workload distribution is benchmarked as a mea- sure by which to analyze the ef ciency of the edge system. Different scenarios are devised and the performance of EC is compared and analyzed with cloud computing systems. Based on the outcomes, the ef ciency of ECis highlighted and the challenges pertaining to different network systems are addressed. 1708 VOLUME 6, 2018 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud FIGURE 3. All-in-one computing architecture. III. AN OVERVIEW OF COMPUTING ARCHITECTURE In this section, we discuss the functional capabilities of differ- ent computing architectures with their physical properties and operational methodologies. In the opening sections, EC archi- tecture is discussed, as shown in Figure 3, highlighting its advantages. Further, we compare other computing architec- tures, such as fog computing (FC), cloud computing (CC) and multi-cloud computing (MCC) and their respective limita- tions are discussed. In EC architecture, computing/processing servers are installed at the edge of the network within the range of the radio access network to perform the computation and provide storage services. The main objective of edge architecture is to provide a better quality-of-experience (QoE) for end users by reduc- ing response time and throughput. It enables different real-time applications and time-critical services to make deci- sions without any delay. Moreover, owing to the inimitable exibility of EC systems, edge devices are compatible with almost all hand-held electronic devices such as smart phones, personal digital assistants, laptops and even on-board units. The applications and services are installed in the edge devices, which process data in close proximity to the users to reduce latency problems. Furthermore, instead of transferring all the data to the centralized server, the edge device lters the information, thus mitigating stress in the backhaul links and enhancing bandwidth utilization in the network. Asignif- icantinnovation made in internet-based computing technol- ogy is FC technology which is often interchangeably used with EC. Both EC and FC architecture push the intelligence closer to the data source, but the key difference is that FC pushes the intelligence up to the local aAreanetwork (LAN) level, whereas EC pushes the intelligence directly to the device or to a dedicated edge server [39]. Like EC, FC also garners huge VOLUME 6, 2018 1709 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud recognition and is widely utilized in various real-time and IoT applications which demand faster data processing. A fog server installed with the LAN processes the data to attain intermediate results and lters the data before transferring the same to the cloud server. As the EC and FC more or less exhibit the same advantage with regard to computation and storage, the performance difference is based on the applica- tions which use them. Another signi cant computing technology which has dom- inated the tech-driven world for more than a decade is CC technology. In CC architecture, computation and storage capabilities are moved to a distant centralized server called the cloud. All the processing and storage occurs at this single point which is handled by a centralized data center. Primarily, cloud architecture can be divided into two different layers namely, the upper layer and lower layer. The lower layer represents the end-user devices with network connectivity and the upper layer represents the centralized servers inbuilt with huge processing and storage power. Using a client-server protocol, the end-user devices can be connected to the cloud servers using either a wired or wireless network. As all the computational functionalities and storage are undertaken at the centralized server, the front-end devices do not require any computing intelligence or data storage capability. Basically, cloud servers can deliver three different services namely, software as a service (SaaS), platform as a service (PaaS) and infrastructure as a service (IaaS). Although these ser- vices seem to be more reliable, the biggest concern is high latency and heavy bandwidth utilization. When compared with EC, cloud servers suffer from a high processing delay that can affect the overall ef ciency of real-time applica- tions. Also, the cloud handles enormous amounts of data at a single server point, which can create congestion in the cloud servers and backhaul links. Similar to CC architecture, MCC architecture is another paradigm which extends CC by distributing the service to multiple clouds. MCC architecture shares the entire work ow model with the CC and makes the veri cation of data redundancy which has a high recovery rate. When compared with EC, MCC also has the same disadvantages as CC, along with complexity and portability issues. The analysis of features on edge paradigms with cloud computing, highlights that the availability and scalability properties are high when compared with the cloud. Nonethe- less, the network architecture bottleneck is overcome by edge as it is distributed and decentralized. Though the paradigms of edge such as fog-computing, mobile edge computing come from varying backgrounds, they all tend to support virtualiza- tion infrastructure (such as cloudlet / fog nodes). One another bene t of edge over cloud is the foreseeable low latency and packet delay or jitter. Therefore, by conducting a detailed comparative anal- ysis of all the major network-based architectures, EC is shownto be the most sought-after architecture for running real-time applications and IoT intelligent services, as ilus- tratedin Figure 2. In adition to its high demand in IoT smart solutions, EC architecture is also widely preferred across several conventional business applications. A. RESEARCH VIEW ON EC Many academicians and research practitioners have effec- tively used EC for different applications to enhance the robustness and dynamicity of their systems. As EC promises an impelling reduction in the latency, effective bandwidth uti- lization and low energy consumption, many real-time appli- cations utilizing CC have upgraded to EC. In this section, we highlight the signi cance of EC from various researchers points of view and a study of different applications that use EC. Recent advancements in augmented reality (AR) appli- cations demand real-time processing and a faster response time. Conventional computing techniques such as CC can- not cope with the growing demands of AR processing. In order to address this issue, Ali and Simeone [14] pro- posed an EC-based scheme for AR applications to achieve ef cient data processing and a quicker response time. Their scheme uses an energy-ef cient resource allocation scheme to enhance reliability for AR applications [14]. Yet another driving trend revolutionizing living rooms is IoT-based smart home applications. Smart home applications are mission-critical and demand low latency and preservation of locality. An EC-based scheme ful lls these demands of smart home applications. A design by Vallati et al. [34] achieves a dramatic reduction in latency and ensures the security of locality information. Sapienza et al. [35] designed an EC-based smart city applica- tion that can effectively detect certain critical events, such as terrorist threats, natural calamities, man-made disasters, etc. In [36] and [37], the researchers selected an EC-based archi- tecture to address various network-related issues in vehicu- lar technology. The authors present an ef cient scheduling and adaptive of oading scheme that reduces the computa- tion complexities in a VANET environment. Furthermore, EC architectures play a vital role in E-health applications whichcould save the lives of many patients. As EC guarantees a faster response and higher throughput, the decision-making process becomes faster and easier in E-health applications. For instance, Ali and Ghazal [38] proposed a real-time heart attack mobile detection service (RHAMDS) using EC which has lower latency when combined with geographical awareness which can accurately detect a patient s location. Therefore, a brief analysis of the contribution of EC across different domains by numerous researchers certifying EC to be a truly reliable computing system, aims to provide an ef cient service in a decentralized manner. Table 1 details the advantages of EC over other computing techniques, providng a comparative analysis of the various computing characteris- tics.When compared with the characteristic features of differ- ent computing techniques, EC has better results than CC and MCC and exhibits an almost similar performance rate with the FC system. The need for the security on edges were triggered and emphasized by researchers due to the put-ups of potential 1710 VOLUME 6, 2018 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud TABLE 1. Summary computing characteristics. insecure sensors, IoT devices installation in composite envi- ronments like smart cities and industrial plants. Therefore, even intelligent edges uncovers data and devices to threats. One such threat to be addressed on an edge paradigm is the technological restriction of the infrastructure. For instance, edge data centers with micro-servers (Raspberry Pi) may lack hardware protection when compared with the other com- modity servers. The other possible threat is the combined security deployment over multiple layers of technologies like network to mobile to cloud on a heterogeneous environment. The threats on edge paradigm may shadow the bene ts, as proper privacy and security mechanisms are not intro- duced. Therefore, the need for security on edge is highly recommended by researchers. B. SERVICE BENEFITS OF EC As numerous business services have transformed from the cloud to the edge owing to its cutting-edge computing services, the economy of scale has signi cantly improved, providing tremendous bene ts to the business services that provide the infrastructure as well as the enterprises using it. Following are some of the signi cant service bene ts of the edge: Using EC, undertaking data analytics is faster which improves the overall performance of real-time applications. The data center implementation cost is notably reduced by selecting nodes as edge servers. It mitigates stress in the backhaul links by alleviating network traf c. It effaces single point of failure and adapts distributed computing. It increases virtualization and scalability in the network. It improves the QoS by minimizing the data transfer distance. It achieves reliability by installing applications in close proximity to the end device. It is inbuilt with less complex and easy-to-manage hard- ware devices. Thus, regardless of whether it is an individual device, or at the eet or plant level, EC has become a mainstream tech- nology that increases the ef ciency and productivity of the business and industrial sectors. C. COMPUTING VS STORAGE SERVICE OF EC/FC/THE CLOUD/MCC In EC, the response time in computation services is in mil- liseconds and supports various application as a service (AaaS) schemes. EC can effectively perform data analytics, predic- tive analysis and virtualization on edge servers. Relying on its lower latency, EC enables ubiquitous computing in smart applications, where the user can interact with the system in real time and have a better QoE. EC supports storage services locally and keeps the data in the server only for a transient time. EC uses storage more for caching than storing, so the data that resides in the edge server is stored only for a transient time. As the storage capacity is limited in EC, large business applications handling enormous amounts of data cannot be handled by EC storage services. Computing services in FC share the same advantages of EC. While the computing capabilities are moved to the LAN it also provides some additional services like cooperation as a service (CaaS) and network as a service (NaaS) to the end users. The storage service in FC gives storage space for a short duration. As the fog nodes lie at the edge of the LAN network, there is more storage space than the EC storage service. Based on the FC server storage con guration, data can reside in the server from hours to days. The computing services in both CC and MCC can be broadly classi ed as IaaS, PaaS and SaaS. The computation VOLUME 6, 2018 1711 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud TABLE 2. Summary computing services. capabilities are very high due to the presence of centralized data centers. Although CC and MCC provision huge com- puting power, the distance between the server and the end user makes the enterprise vulnerable to high latency, which is not suitable for real-time processing and IoT applications. The storage service in CC and MCC is enormously huge so it can store data permanently,the only difference being that MCC offers more data safety/protection and a greater error recovery rate by mirroring the data in different servers. A detailed comparative analysis on computing services and storage services for a variety of architecturesis shown in Table 2. D. COMPUTING IN HETEROGENEOUS DISTRIBUTED NETWORKS For more than a decade, the major contribution and signi - cance of traditional computing schemes such as CC and MCC over heterogeneous distributed networks such as MANETs, VANETs and IoVshas widely enhanced computational capa- bilities in tech-driven smart city development. The major advantage of cloud-based services is that they provide enor- mous computing power and storage capacity to these net- works. However, the applications used in these distributed networks are mission-critical and the centralized architecture used in CC stimulates the end devices to transfer the data to the cloud server through backhaul links, thus making the backbone network loaded with heavy traf c congestion. Also, due to the distance between the server and end devices, the applications also encounter severe time delay which might affect the overall performance of the system. Therefore, to cope with the ballooning computational demands of smart applications, new computing paradigms such as edge and fog computing have evolved, potentially addressing major challenges and concerns in terms of a low latency require- ment, less network utilization, lower implementation cost, etc. These computing services push computing capabilities to the edge of the network and provide computation of oading at close proximity to user nodes, the details of which are shown in Table 3. Some of the major MANET applications such as interactive media, video streaming, computer games, e-commerce, etc., transmit enormous amounts of data to the cloud. This data transfer increases the overall throughput, hence using EC can signi cantly reduce data transfer by ltering and processing the data at the edge server. Thus, using EC in MANET applications ensures energy ef ciency and less bandwidth utilization for the network. As VANETs and IoVs deal with lifesaving events, the applications become time critical. Using EC to meet this requirement helps pro- cess the information in milliseconds resulting in prompt action. As a result, numerous accidents and congestion in the transportation network are avoided. Thus summarizing, EC provides the utmost reliability and scalability, garnering huge demand and be a strong preference for various smart city projects across the globe such as smart homes, smart sensing, smart transportation, smart healthcare, smart security and much more. E. PRIVACY AND SECURITY ISSUES RELATING TO EC EC plays a pivotal role in delivering a latency sensitive ser- vice to various heterogeneous network smart applications, however, it could impose issues related to the security and privacy of the system. Some of the major challenges are brie y summarizedas follws: When compared with CC, EC servers are distributed at the edge of the network which makes the system more vulnera- ble to various security threats. Existing encryption standards will not be applicable in EC due to the resource constraints existing in the servers. In order to provide reliable protection against security threats and attacks, a light-weight authen- tication scheme needs to be modeled where the EC servers authenticate the end devices without any time delay. Another issue for EC is the challenge in managing trust between the edge server and end nodes. As edge servers are distributed throughout the network, the trust computation from one EC server cannot carry forward the trust to the other EC servers. As node mobility is high in distributed networks such as VANETs and MANETs, the nodes will encounter different edge servers and thus, need to be authenticated from time to time. To do this, a reliable trust management system needs to be integrated into the EC environment which is capa- ble of handling trust from both the servers and end nodes. 1712 VOLUME 6, 2018 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud TABLE 3. Computing in MANET and VANET. In addition to this, maintaining the privacy of data is equally challenging in EC, as information processing is pushed to the edge of the network. Consequently, smart applications will generate a greater amount of personalized information and location awareness data that can easily be compromised due to the openness in the environment. Thus, a reliable data pro- tection and trust validation scheme needs to be incorporated in the system which can signi cantly protect the geographical location accuracy and personal data of the users. IV. INTEGRATION OF IoT WITH EDGES Currently, more than 20 billion IoT devices are deployed on the Internet, and this number is expected to increase in scale over the next ve to 10 years [39], [40]. The IoT com- prises billions of Internet-connected devices or things, each of which can sense, communicate, compute, and potentially actuate, and can have intelligence, multimodal interfaces, physical/virtual identities, and attributes [39]. Edge datacen- ters are mainly deployed to bring the computing facilities from the IoT infrastructure. Current IoT devices generatea huge amount of data termed as big data [41], hence we need a dedicated computing infrastructure to process this in near real-time. In recent days, IoT devices are being deployed to sense and/or work as the source of data and transmit these data to the cloud for processing and storage. Due to the high demand for real-time data analysis, edge computing comes into the picture. In current research, edge devices are deployed in the base station of the network, so that data streams transmit to cloud through the edge devices. Hence, edge devices can perform lightweight computing in the emerging situation and transmit the data streams to the cloud for batch processing. The combination of the IoT, edges and the cloud is also known as fog computing. V. RELATED WORK Ali and Simeone [14] proposed a novel energy-ef cient resource allocation scheme for augmented reality applica- tions using mobile edge computing (MEC). In this scheme, the system overhead is effectively reduced by the joint opti- mization of communication and computational resources. A successive convex approximation function is utilized to ensure optimized energy consumption in MEC. The results show that the proposed system achieves better of oad- ing when compared with conventional techniques [14]. Amjad et al. [15] presented a resource allocation framework for IoT applications based on EC. The framework inte- grates a dynamic resource allocation scheme with the EC resource requirement scheme to provide an ef cient solu- tion for the enterprise cloud. As the cloud operating system VOLUME 6, 2018 1713 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud supports bidirectional resource sharing, a universal resource allocation framework for IoTis achieved. The experimen- tal results show that the proposed system achieves more ef ciency in handling the resource allocation requests [15]. Beraldi et al. [16] developed a cooperative load balancing scheme called CooLoadwhich is installed at the edge of the network to reduce execution delay. Based on this cooperative scheme, the data centers share their buffer space with one another based on its availability. If a data center buffer is full, the received request is forwarded to another data center with buffer space availability. The experimental results show that the proposed system signi cantly improves the performance of the computing services [16]. Badarneh et al. [17] designed a wireless-based software- de ned mobile edge computing (SDMEC) framework to enhance the management of storage services in wireless net- works. Based on the increase in network demand, the pro- posed system auto-scales the network storage resources to deliver a better QoE. The experimental results show that the proposed system achieves minimum latency in the net- work [17]. Chen et al. [18] presented a game theoretic approach to study the of oading problem for mobile-edge cloud computing. In order to achieve an optimized computa- tion in the network, the system formulates a multi-user com- putation of oading game among the mobile device users in a distributed manner. The game approach effectively of oads computation among multi-users and successfully achieves the Nash equilibrium property. The experimental results show that the proposed system achieves better of oading perfor- mance [18]. Dama et al. [19] provided a solution for con- nectivity problems in the cellular Internet of Things (C-IoT) with EC. In this scheme, the system adopts two different RACH mechanisms which reduces the number of collisions in the network. Using the RACH mechanism, numerous devices can be integrated into C-IoT with less energy con- sumption. The results show that the proposed mechanism allows C-IoT devices to connect without any connectivity issues [19]. Kumar et al. [20] designed a smart grid data management scheme for a vehicular delay-tolerant network in the mobile edge computing paradigm. A virtual machine migration approach is utilized to minimize the energy con- sumption at the data centers. Both computing and communi- cations issues are managed by electric vehicles located at the edge of the network and autonomous decisions are made. The experimental results show that the proposed system achieves higher throughput and minimum delay in the network [20]. Laredo et al. [21] proposed a self-organized critical approach to achieve energy ef ciency in load-balancing computational workloads. The system follows a Bak-Tang- Wiesenfeld sand-pile cellular automation model for schedul- ing independent tasks in the system. The experimental results show that the proposed system achieves better resource uti- lization without compromising the QoS [21]. Le et al. [22] proposed a novel edge computing system architecture for highly dynamic and volatile environments to deliver fail- proof applications. The proposed system automatically detects the partial failure of edge networks and dynamically changes the device clusters to peer-to-peer communications until the edge network recovers. The experimental results show that the proposed system is resilient and ef cient with mobile edge computations over unreliable networks [22]. Liyanage et al. [23] designed a mobile-embedded platform as a service (mePaaS) model for the edge IoT devices. A resource-aware autonomous service con guration is performed at the edge of IoT networks to manage hard- ware resource availability. The test-bed results show sig- ni cant improvement in the computation performance of the mePaaS nodes [23]. Li et al. [24] developed a novel MEC architecture, achieving minimal latency in cellular- based vehicular networks. The system implements an MEC server which connects with the road side base-stations to provide a exible vehicle-related service. Further, to promote network customization in vehicular networks, the proposed system incorporates MEC-assisted network slicing and an optimized traf c scheduling policy. Finally, the performance of mobility management is enhanced by redesigning the inter- cell handover mechanism for the vehicles [24]. Liu et al. [25] proposed a Markov decision process for the task scheduling policy in MEC systems. This nds the point of delay in the optimal task scheduling policy in the sys- tem, and the proposed model uses a one-dimensional search algorithm which minimizes the average delay and power con- sumption in the mobile edge device. The experimental results show that the proposed system achieves minimum delay when compared with the baseline approaches [25]. Mao et al. [26] developed an effective computation of oading strategy for MEC systems using energy harvesting (EH) mobile devices. The proposed model adapts the Lyapunovoptimization-based dynamic computation of oading (LODCO) algorithm to address of oading decisions. The decisions are made based on the current system state without requiring distribution information of the EH processes. The simulation results show that the proposed system outperforms the benchmarked policies [26]. Mao et al. [27] presented a low-complexity sub-optimal algorithm for MEC systems. The system uses a ow-shop scheduling theory to determine optimal task of oading and the scheduling decisions are performed by the convex optimization techniques. The simulation results show that task of oading scheduling ensures less delay than conventional techniques [27]. Rimal et al. [28] introduced the novel concept of using ber-wireless (FiWi) access networks to optimize MEC ser- vices. A two-layer time-division multiplexing (TDM) based uni ed resource management scheme is proposed for MEC over ethernet-based FiWi networks. An investigation is made on the design scenarios of the MEC over FiWi networks using different radio access network (RAN) technologies. The anal- ysis proves that the proposed scheme provides reliable energy consumption with MEC over FiWi [28]. An extension of the work [28] is presented by Rimal et al. [29]. The authors proposed a MEC enabled FiWi broadband for low-latency and resource-intensive MEC applications. Further, to build 1714 VOLUME 6, 2018 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud TABLE 4. Edge, Fog, Cloud Standards. FiWi access, the proposed system integrates the ethernet- passive optical networks (EPON), wireless local area net- works (WLANs) and cloudlets. Additionally, to of oad delay in the network, a novel cloudlet-aware resource manage- ment scheme is proposed by the FiWi dynamic bandwidth allocation process integrated with a time division multiple access. The experiments are carried out in the test-bed and the proposed analytical model is effective in reducing delays and conserving more energy [29]. Rodrigues et al. [30] proposed an analytic model for minimizing service delay in the ECC systems. System service delays, such as processing delay and transmission delay in the network are minimized by using two cloudlet servers. By improving the virtual machine migration, the computation and communication overheads are reduced in the network. The experimental results show that the proposed method has lesser processing delays when compared with other conventional methods [30]. Despite of all the other reasons for the migration to edge is the need for a minimum latency over the network and a predictable packet delay variation. The analysis over the features of both edge and cloud is clari ed in detail with Table 1. VI. FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS ON EC Today, the IoT is almost everywhere and is being incorporated in many different ways. It is predictedto be the major driving factor for the future. In upcoming years, innumerable sensors, computing systems and Internet-equipped smart applications will soon take the entire tech world by storm. In order to cope with these mammoth demands, a reliable EC scheme should be executed that can dexterously handle both pro- cessing and communication, making it an optimized system. We have discussed a few signi cant processing models that need to be in-built in future edge-based servers. First and foremost, an ef cient computation of oading model should be incorporated to achieve optimized performance in real- time scenarios. This improvised scheme should be capable of allocating appropriate tasks for both EC and CC systems. The second additional feature should be an upgraded resource allocation model integrated to manage the shift between the edge and cloud computing. The nal feature that needs to be incorporated is an effective scheduling algorithm that can signi cantly achieve energy ef ciency and at the same time, reliably manage and control distributed EC-based servers in different heterogeneous networks. As an inference of this study on edge paradigms, the integration of edge is still in its embryonic stage; consequently, there are manifold issues that have to be addressedin near future. VII. CONCLUSIONS With the staunch objective towards providing a better ser- vice to the IoT paradigm, different computing technologies have introduced new standards and policies for numerous IoT applications. Conventionally, CC is one of the most pur- sued computing techniques, delivering computing resources and other services to IoT applications through the Internet. So, to provide an ef cient and upgraded service to IoT smart applications, FC and EC have recently evolved which effec- tively function by pushing cloud capabilities to the edge of the network. EC and FC technology can provide elastic resources that allow for distributed data processing and protects the data from the drawbacks of traditional centralized architecture. To conclude, the current standards of EC and FC provide a reliable and an improved quality of service to IoT applications when compared with CC standards. A detailed comparison of edge, fog and cloud standards is given in Table 4. However, to provide an upgraded and ef cient service, based on the rising demands of IoT applications, an appropriate computing technology needs to be incorporated. Due to the high imple- mentation cost, the selection of computing technology should be well planned and needs to be tested before implementing and executing real-time applications in the future. REFERENCES [1] (2015). Gartner Gartner Says 6.4 Billion Connected Things Will Be in Use in 2016, Up 30 Percent From 2015. [Online]. Available: http://www. gartner.com/newsroom/id/3165317 [2] (2015). Mckinsey By 2025, Internet of Things Applications Could Have $11 Trillion Impact. [Online]. Available: http://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/ overview/in-the-news/by-2025-internet-of-thingsapplications-could- have-11-trillion-impact [3] K. Cassar, White Paper: Amazon Echo: Seattle s Sonic Boom is Felt Beyond e-Commerce. San Mateo, CA, USA: Slice Intelligence, Inc. Apr. 2016. [Online]. Available: http://intelligence.slice.com/ [4] Google Nest, White Paper: Nest Learning Thermostat Ef ciency Simula- tion: Update Using Data From First Three Months, Nest Labs, Palo Alto, CA, USA, Apr. 2015. [5] M. M. Michaels, White Paper: The Apple Watch Case Study: What We Can Learn and Apply From an Affordance Analysis, Hum. Factors Int., Fair eld, LA, USA, Nov. 2015. [6] (2016). Cisco DevNet: IOx. [Online]. Available: https://developer.cisco. com/site/iox/documents/developer-guide [7] Predix White Paper: Predix Architecture and Servies. [Online]. Avail- able: https://d154rjc49kgakj.cloudfront.net/GE_Predix_Architecture_and _Services-20161128.pdf [8] White Paper: OpenWay Riva Adaptive Communications Technology, Itron, Inc. Liberty Lake, WA, USA, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.itron.com/ [9] B. A. A. Nunes, M. Mendonca, X.-N. Nguyen, K. Obraczka, and T. Turletti, A survey of software-de ned networking: Past, present, and future of programmable networks, IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1617 1634, Feb. 2014. VOLUME 6, 2018 1715 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud [10] S. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Yang, and W. Wang, A survey on mobile edge networks: Convergence of computing, caching and com- munications, IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 6757 6779, 2017. [11] H. Liu, F. Eldarrat, H. Alqahtani, A. Reznik, X. de Foy, and Y. Zhang, Mobile edge cloud system: Architectures, challenges, and approaches, IEEE Syst. J., to be published. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7843586/, doi: 10.1109/JSYST.2017. 2654119. [12] P. Mach and Z. Becvar, Mobile edge computing: A survey on architecture and computation of oading, IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1628 1656, 3rd Quart., 2017. [13] T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, B. Mada, H. Flinck, S. Dutta, and D. Sabella, On multi-access edge computing: A survey of the emerging 5G network edge cloud architecture and orchestration, IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1657 1681, 3rd Quart., 2017. [14] A. Al-Shuwaili and O. Simeone, Energy-ef cient resource alloca- tion for mobile edge computing-based augmented reality applica- tions, IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 398 401, Jun. 2017. [15] A. Amjad, F. Rabby, S. Sadia, M. Patwary, and E. Benkhelifa, Cog- nitive edge computing based resource allocation framework for Internet of Things, in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Fog Mobile Edge Comput. (FMEC), May 2017, pp. 194 200. [16] R. Beraldi, A. Mtibaa, and H. Alnuweiri, Cooperative load balancing scheme for edge computing resources, in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Fog Mobile Edge Comput. (FMEC), May 2017, pp. 94 100. [17] J. Al-Badarneh, Y. Jararweh, M. Al-Ayyoub, M. Al-Smadi, and R. Fontes, Software de ned storage for cooperative mobile edge computing sys- tems, in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Softw. De ned Syst. (SDS), May 2017 , pp. 174 179. [18] X. Chen, L. Jiao, W. Li, and X. Fu, Ef cient multi-user computation of oading for mobile-edge cloud computing, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 2795 2808, Oct. 2016. [19] S. Dama, V. Sathya, K. Kuchi, and T. V. Pasca, A feasible cellular Internet of Things: Enabling edge computing and the IoT in dense futuristic cellular networks, IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 66 72, Jan. 2017. [20] N. Kumar, S. Zeadally, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, Vehicular delay-tolerant networks for smart grid data management using mobile edge computing, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 6 60, Oct. 2016. [21] J. L. J. Laredo, F. Guinand, D. Olivier, and P. Bouvry, Load balancing at the edge of chaos: How self-organized criticality can lead to energy- ef cient computing, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 517 529, Feb. 2017. [22] M. Le, Z. Song, Y.-W. Kwon, and E. Tilevich, Reliable and ef cient mobile edge computing in highly dynamic and volatile environments, in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Fog Mobile Edge Comput. (FMEC), May 2017, pp. 113 120. [23] M. Liyanage, C. Chang, and S. N. Srirama, mePaaS: mobile-embedded platform as a service for distributing fog computing to edge nodes, in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Comput., Appl. Technol. (PDCAT), Dec. 2016, pp. 73 80. [24] L. Li, Y. Li, and R. Hou, A novel mobile edge computing-based archi- tecture for future cellular vehicular networks, in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Mar. 2017, pp. 1 6. [25] J. Liu, Y. Mao, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, Delay-optimal computation task scheduling for mobile-edge computing systems, in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2016, pp. 1451 1455. [26] Y. Mao, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, Dynamic computation of oading for mobile-edge computing with energy harvesting devices, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 3590 3605, Dec. 2016. [27] Y. Mao, J. Zhang, and K. B. Letaief, Joint task of oading scheduling and transmit power allocation for mobile-edge computing systems, in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Mar. 2017, pp. 1 6. [28] B. P. Rimal, D. P. Van, and M. Maier, Mobile edge computing empowered ber-wireless access networks in the 5G era, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 192 200, Feb. 2017. [29] B. P. Rimal, D. P. Van, and M. Maier, Cloudlet enhanced ber-wireless access networks for mobile-edge computing, IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 3601 3618, Jun. 2017. [30] T. G. Rodrigues, K. Suto, H. Nishiyama, and N. Kato, Hybrid method for minimizing service delay in edge cloud computing through VM migration and transmission power control, IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 810 819, May 2017. [31] W. Shi, J. Cao, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, and L. Xu, Edge computing: Vision and challenges, IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 637 646, Oct. 2016. [32] T. X. Tran, A. Hajisami, P. Pandey, and D. Pompili, Collaborative mobile edge computing in 5G networks: New paradigms, scenarios, and chal- lenges, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 54 61, Apr. 2017. [33] B. Varghese, N. Wang, S. Barbhuiya, P. Kilpatrick, and D. S. Nikolopoulos, Challenges and opportunities in edge computing, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Smart Cloud (SmartCloud), Nov. 2016, pp. 20 26. [34] C. Vallati, A. Virdis, E. Mingozzi, and G. Stea, Mobile-edge computing come home connecting things in future smart homes using LTE device- to-device communications, IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 77 83, Oct. 2016. [35] M. Sapienza, E. Guardo, M. Cavallo, G. La Torre, G. Leombruno, and O. Tomarchio, Solving critical events through mobile edge comput- ing: An approach for smart cities, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Smart Comput. (SMARTCOMP), May 2016, pp. 1 5. [36] J. Feng, Z. Liu, C. Wu, and Y. Ji, AVE: Autonomous vehicu- lar edge computing framework with ACO-based scheduling, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 10660 10675, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.1109/TVT.2017.2714704. [37] K. Zhang, Y. Mao, S. Leng, Y. He, and Y. Zhang, Mobile-edge computing for vehicular networks: A promising network paradigm with predictive off- loading, IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 36 44, Jun. 2017, doi: 10.1109/MVT.2017.2668838. [38] S. Ali and M. Ghazal, Real-time heart attack mobile detection service (RHAMDS): An IoT use case for software de ned networks, in Proc. IEEE 30th Can. Conf. Elect. Comput. Eng. (CCECE), Apr. 2017, pp. 1 6. [39] D. Puthal, S. Nepal, R. Ranjan, and J. Chen, Threats to networking cloud and edge datacenters in the Internet of Things, IEEE Cloud Comput., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 64 71, May/Jun. 2016. [40] D. Puthal, S. Nepal, R. Ranjan, and J. Chen, A synchronized shared key generation method for maintaining end-to-end security of big data streams, in Proc. 50th Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. (HICSS), Waikoloa, HI, USA, Jan. 2017, pp. 6011 6020. [41] S. Sharma, D. Puthal, S. Tazeen, M. Prasad, and A. Y. Zomaya, MSGR: A mode-switched grid-based sustainable routing protocol for wireless sensor networks, IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 19864 19875, 2017. HESHAM EL-SAYED is an Associate Professor at the College of Information Technology, United Arab Emirates University, UAE. His current research interests include Internet of Things, trust management, intelligent transporta- tion systems, and vehicular ad-hoc networks. Before joining UAE Univer- sity, he held several industrial positions at Nortel Networks, Wind River Systems (acquired by Intel Corporation), and Paragon Networks (acquired by Carrier Access Corporation, then Turin Networks, Force10 Networks, and Dell Inc.) During his tenure in the industry, he led several projects focused on performance optimization of network protocols and architectures. His contributions in these areas had tangible impact on the performance of real commercial products, which led to the receiving of several prestigious awards, including Nortel Networks President s Award of Excellence in Lead- ership and the Paragon Networks CEO Award of Excellence. SHARMI SANKAR is currently the Head of the Scienti c Research Depart- ment, Ministry of Higher Education, Oman. She has over 17 years of experience in academics. Her domain interests fall under the categories of algorithmic optimization, machine learning, network traf c analysis, predic- tive analytics, quality of service improvements, and big data management. MUKESH PRASAD received the master s degree in computer application from Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2015. He is currently a Lecturer with the School of Software, University of Technology Sydney, Australia. He has published papers in international journal and conferences includ- ing the IEEE Transactions, ACM, Elsevier, and Springer. His current research interests include machine learning, pattern recognition, fuzzy systems, neural networks, arti cial intelligence, and brain computer interface. 1716 VOLUME 6, 2018 H. El-Sayed et al.: Edge of Things: The Big Picture on the Integration of Edge, IoT and the Cloud DEEPAK PUTHAL received the Ph.D. degree in computer and information systems from the University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Australia. He is currently a Lecturer (Assistant Professor) with the School of Computing and Communications, UTS, Australia. His research interests include cyber security, Internet of Things, distributed computing, and big data analytics. He has published in several international conferences and journals including the IEEE and ACM Transactions. He is an Associate Editor of the IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine and the KSII Transactions on Internet and Information Systems. He also served as the Co-Guest Editor of several reputed international journals, including CONCURRENCY AND COMPUTATION: PRAC- TICE AND EXPERIENCE, Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, the IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine. AKSHANSH GUPTA is currently a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with the School of Computational and Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru Univer- sity (JNU), New Delhi, India, the master s and Ph.D. degrees from the School of Computer and Systems Sciences, JNU, in 2010 and 2015, respectively. His research interests include signal processing, brain computer interface, cognitive science, and healthcare. MANORANJAN MOHANTY received the master s and Ph.D. degree from the School of Computer and Systems Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India and the National University of Singapore, Singapore, respectively. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with the Centre of Cyber Security, New York University, Abu Dhabi. His research inter- ests include signal processing, cyber security, information retrieval, image processing, and information theory. CHIN-TENG LIN received the B.S. degree from National Chiao-Tung Uni- versity (NCTU), Taiwan, in 1986, and the master s and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Purdue University, USA, in 1989 and 1992, respectively. He is currently the Chair Professor of the Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, the Chair Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering, NCTU, the International Faculty of the University of California at San-Diego, and the Honorary Professorship of the University of Nottingham. He is the Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE CAS Society from 2003 to 2005, and CIS Society from 2015 to 2017. He was elevated to be an IEEE Fellow for his contributions to biologically inspired information systems in 2005, and was elevated International Fuzzy Systems Association Fellow in 2012. He also served on the Board of Governors at the IEEE Circuits and Systems (CAS) Society from 2005 to 2008, the IEEE Systems, Man, Cybernetics Society from 2003 to 2005, the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society (CIS) from 2008 to 2010, and the Chair of IEEE Taipei Section from 2009 to 2010. He served as the Deputy Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS-II from 2006 to 2008. He was elected as the Editor-in-chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS, since 2011. Prof. Lin has published over 200 journal papers (Total Citation: 20,155, H-index: 53, i10-index: 373) in the areas of neural networks, fuzzy systems, multimedia hardware/software, and cognitive neuro-engineering, including approximately 101 IEEE journal papers. He was the Program Chair of the IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics in 2005 and the General Chair of the 2011 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems. He is the co-author of Neural Fuzzy Systems (Prentice-Hall), and the author of Neural Fuzzy Control Systems with Structure and Parameter Learning (World Scienti c). VOLUME 6, 2018 1717