See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/271495231 A novel spatial correlation model for wireless sensor network applications Conference Paper September 2012 DOI: 10.1109/WOCN.2012.6335549 CITATIONS 16 READS 124 3 authors, including: Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Wireless Sensor Networks View project Optical CDMA View project Dr.Rajeev K. Shakya Adama Science and Technology University 13 PUBLICATIONS 106 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Yatindra Singh Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 170 PUBLICATIONS 1,224 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Dr.Rajeev K. Shakya on 11 July 2022. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. A Novel Spatial Correlation Model for Wireless Sensor Network Applications Rajeev K. Shakya, Yatindra Nath Singh, and Nishchal K. Verma Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur Email: {rajeevs,ynsingh,nishchal}@iitk.ac.in Abstract Wireless sensor networks (WSN) are densely de- ployed to promise the ne-grain monitoring in various appli- cations. For example, it may be as high as 20 nodes/m3 or more [1]. Due to high density of sensor nodes, spatially correlated information is observed and transmitted by surrounding sensor nodes once an interest of event detected. Thus, there exists spatial correlation among the sensor observations. The spatial correlation brings signi cant potential advantages along with collaborative nature of the WSN in energy-ef cient design of communication protocols. This paper presents a novel spatial correlation model for wireless sensor networks. Based on sensor coverage model and location of sensor nodes, a spatial correlation function is derived to describe the correlation characteristics of measurements observed by sensor nodes. The case studies using correlation function are performed to study the correlation relationship between sensor nodes. Finally, based on case studies, their results, and discussions, a correlated cell construction algorithm is proposed and possible approaches are explored to exploit spatial correlation for ef cient medium access and clustering protocols for WSN. Index Terms spatial correlation, MAC protocol, Clustering protocol,Wireless Sensor Networks. I. INTRODUCTION The recent developments of wireless sensor network (WSN) have enabled low cost, low power sensor nodes which are capable of sensing, processing and transmitting sensory data from sensing environment such as surveillance elds. These sensor nodes cooperatively monitor physical environmental conditions (for examples temperature, sound, pressure etc.) ac- curately in space and time to detect the events of interest. Since sensor nodes have limited battery power which gets depleted easily, the sensor nodes will die out in the network. The failure of nodes should not affect the overall performance of the network. However, It could be impossible to replace/change the battery, because sensor nodes may be deployed in remote locations and thus replacing the batteries could be costly or time-consuming. A signi cant amount of energy is consumed in transmission and reception and idle mode, while very low energy loss in sleep mode. Therefore, forcing the nodes into sleep mode whenever possible will be optimal solution to increase life-time of the network. The primary function of a sensor network is to sample sensory information from its vicinity such as temperature, light etc., and send this information to the base station node. The base station node mostly forwards all the data wire-line or an independent wireless network to control center. The sensor nodes in such network operate as a collective structure which (a) Sink Event Area Sink (b) Fig. 1. Examples of reporting of event information in an event area for wireless sensor networks. makes this network different than traditional ad-hoc networks. Due to high density of sensor nodes spatially correlated information is observed and transmitted by surrounding sensor nodes once an interest of event appeared in sensor eld. Thus it may not be necessary that every sensor nodes should report its sensed data to the sink due to redundancy in data. For example, in Fig. 1(a), four black nodes denote active nodes inside event area, and big circle denotes the correlation region, in which sensor nodes have similar readings. We can see that these four sensor nodes are selected according to correlation region to cover whole event area. Hence observed information from these selected sensor nodes are suf cient to detect/estimate the event source at the sink. In addition, it is also noted here that redundant reports are minimized according to correlation characteristics among sensor nodes. For example, in Fig. 1(b) the six black nodes are insuf cient to cover the entire event area and redundant information is also observed from these nodes at sink. The correlation in WSN and exploiting the correlation of sensory data have been studied by Vuran et al. [2], Scaglione and Servetto [3], Yoon and Shahabi [4], Guoqiang et al. [5] and so on. In this paper, we study the correlation characteristics among sensor nodes for sensor network applications. Based on sensor coverage model and location of nodes, we propose a math- ematical framework to drive correlation function for sensor 978-1-4673-1989-8/12/$31.00 2012 IEEE network applications. More speci cally, given a certain area of interest, suppose there are N sensor nodes that can sense it. We will derive a correlation coef cients to describe the degree of correlation between N sensor nodes. After getting the spatial correlation coef cient (i.e. correlation function), we study relationship between positions of nodes and correlation function. Intuitively, the spatial correlation between sensor nodes is directly related to the correlation characteristics of event information observed by these sensor nodes. If the sensor nodes are less correlated, they will provide more reliable information to the sink. An example is shown in Fig.1. Thus, some possible approaches are also discussed to exploit spatial correlation for ef cient medium access and clustering protocols for WSN. Finally, the case studies are performed and a correlation set construction algorithm is proposed based on results and analysis. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II brie y states the problem to be studied. The spatial correlation function along with case studies is introduced in Section III. Finally the conclusion is presented in Section IV, followed by references. II. PROBLEM STATEMENT In densely deployed WSN, many sensor nodes in an event area observe the event information and send this information to the sink. Due to physical properties related to sensed event, this information is highly correlated according to degree of correlation between sensor nodes based on location of sensor nodes. Fig. 1 gives the examples of such behavior. For a certain area of interest, suppose there are N sensor nodes that can sense it, we denote them N = {n1, n2, n3, ...} with spatial coordinates, {s1, s2, s3...}. There exists correlation among these nodes based on location, which can be exploited to increase the overall network performance. III. PROPOSED CORRELATION MODEL In this section, we present a correlation model that derives the correlation function to describe the characteristics among sensor nodes for sensor network applications. It helps in determining the mutually correlated nodes based on spatial location in randomly deployed sensor networks. We rst consider the sensor deploying model stating all assumptions in next section, before presenting the proposed correlation model. The performance evolution, discussions, and case studies are then performed to gain more insight using correlation model for the development of possible communication approaches for WSN. A. Sensor Deploying Model Consider a sensor network application where large number of sensor nodes are deployed randomly over the surveillance region. An example of nodes deployment for WSN is shown in Fig. 2. The circle area indicates the event area; the dashed circle represents valid sensing area of the sensors; black node represents sink node; white nodes represent sensor nodes; and a random event is represented by star. Recall that wireless Sink Node Sensor Node Random Event Sensing Range Event Area Fig. 2. The model architecture sensor networks are characterized by their coverage range (i.e., sensing range for detecting the events) and transmitting range (for communicating with sensor nodes). The followings are a few reasonable assumptions. (i) All the sensor nodes are assumed to follow the boolean disk coverage Model, which means that sensor nodes have xed sensing radius and sensing area is represented by a disk centered at the sensor node s spatial position. All the events within such a disk is sensed by the sensor node while no event outside the disk, is sensed. This sensing model is traditionally known as omni- directional sensing model [6]. (ii) Apart from sensing range, each sensor node has a communication range which is much larger than sensing range. (iii) The sink node is only interested in collective reports from all nodes of a detected event. (iv) There is no movement among sensor nodes after deployment, so the location information of each node is known and distance between its neighbors can also be acquired. B. The correlation Model In this section, we derive a correlation function to describe the degree of correlation among sensor nodes in the event area. Since a boolean disk coverage model is considered with sensing range r at location si, sj, the fraction of common sensing area covered by two circular disks represents the correlation coef cient, denoted by K {||si sj||} which is function of distance (i.e., ||si sj||) between sensor node ni and nj as shown in Fig. 3. Here will be a control parameter discussed later. It is noted that intuitively, the spatial correlation between sensor nodes is directly related to the correlation characteris- tics of event information observed by these sensor nodes in spatial domain [2]. To nd the correlation coef cient among N nodes in event area, assuming that N nodes observe the event source S in the event area. We then construct a mathematical model to compute the correlation with respect to event source S. The correlation between different sensor nodes can be described by their readings, which will be represented as a covariance function in set Z. From statistical properties, here Z is                    Fig. 3. The spatial circular correlation model assumed to be a random matrix associated with measured readings of sensor nodes (i.e. correlation coef cients). Consider event area S is random eld, total sensor nodes, N = {n1, n2, n3, ...} are within event area with spatial coordinates, {s1, s2, s3...}. The data set Z = {z(n1), z(n2), z(n3), ...} contains the measured information from all the sensor nodes. The sink node will be responsi- ble for collecting these readings to compute the correlation characteristics between sensor nodes. Note that since event area is random variable, so Z is also assumed to be random variable. We use the notations zi,zj instead of z(ni), z(ni) for simplicity. The data set Z is associated with covariance function K (.), which is function of correlation coef cients between the sensor nodes. Now, we found from statistical properties: corr{zi, zj} = cov{zi, zj} var{zi}.var{zj} = K {||si sj||} (1) where K {||si sj||} denotes the correlation coef cient of sensor node ni and nj. The K {||si sj||} decreases monotonically with distance d (i.e. ||si sj||) between sensor node ni and nj, located at si and sj respectively. 1) Symbols and notation used: In this section, we use geometric notation to design a mathematical model using two sensor nodes with disk coverage of radius r. As shown in Fig. 3, the symbols used are as follows. Si denotes the sensing region of node ni that is a circular area with radius r centered at si. Each sensor nodes pairs ni and nj have common sensing area with triple (P 1 ij, P 2 ij, ij), where (P 1 ij, P 2 ij) indicates the two intersections between si and sj, and denotes the effective angle. d(i,j) is the distance between nodes pairs located at si and sj. Lij is the chord length, denoted by length of connected line between two intersections given by (P 1 ij, P 2 ij), where Lij = 2.  r2 d2 (i,j)/4. A is area of the circular region. Aj i is area of region surrounded by arc denoted by P 1 ijP 2 ij for Si and chord denoted by P 1 ijP 2 ij (shown by shaded area). Ai j is area of region surrounded by arc denoted by P 1 ijP 2 ij for Sj and chord denoted by P 1 ijP 2 ij. 2) The correlation model: If d(i,j) < 2r, Si overlaps with Sj, then we de ne the correlation as K (d(i,j)) = Aj i + Ai j A (2) where K (d(i,j)) is the decreasing function with distance d, following the limiting value of 1 at d(i,j) = 0 and of 0 to d(i,j) 2r. The Aj i and Ai j are same due to symmetry as shown in Fig. 3. Aj i = r2 cos 1 ( d(i,j) 2r ) 2 Lijd(i,j) 4 = Ai j (3) From Eq. (2), we get K (d(i,j)) = cos 1 ( d(i,j) 2r ) d(i,j) 2 r2 s.  (r2 d2 (i,j) 4 ) (4) Let be a control parameter, and = 2r, Eq. (4) is simpli ed as K (d(i,j)) = cos 1 ( d(i,j) ) d(i,j) 2 .  ( 2 d2 (i,j)) (5) We see that when d(i,j) = 2r, the correlation model gives zero value. It means that there is no correlation between sensor nodes. So, we introduce a control parameter equal to 2r, as a variable to control the correlation among nodes. Thus, the correlation model can be rewritten in general form as follow. K (d) = cos 1 ( d ) d 2 .  ( 2 d2) For 0 d ; = 0 For d > . (6) where = 2r, and d = ||si sj||. It is clearly seen from Eq. (6) that when covariance function K (d) is 0, it means that there is no correlation between sensor node ni and nj, located at distance d to each other. If it is equal to 1, then sensor nodes are highly correlated. C. Discussion In sensor network applications, as long as area of in- terest is speci ed, the correlation characteristics of sensory observations of nodes can be obtained as given in previous Section. The proposed correlation model can be used to design distributed source coding between sensor nodes as well data aggregation of sensor measurements in WSNs. The distributed source coding is a compression mechanism used 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 x (meters) y (meters) Fig. 4. Random distribution of 200 nodes with = 9. to reduce spatial correlation between sensor nodes. However, the proposed model is a general correlation model that can be applied to all sensor network applications, because the assumptions used in this model are common for WSNs. The sensor coverage model is the traditionally used sensing model for WSNs. Generally, sensor nodes are equipped with temper- ature, humidity, magnetic sensors etc. These sensors can sense in 360 around the sensor node. So unit disk coverage model (also known as omni-directional sensing model) is valid for WSNs [6]. The proposed correlation model is different from common covariance models given in [7], because it considers the real network conditions of WSNs such as location of nodes, sensing range, and distance between them. In addition, the proposed correlation model can help in design of energy-ef cient communication protocols for WSNs. For example, the Vuran et al. [8] and Guoqiang et al. [5] have used different covariance functions [7] to determine the relationship between the locations of sensor nodes and event estimation reliability in order to design energy-ef cient MAC protocol. We can apply our proposed correlation model to the work by Vuran et al. [8] and Guoqiang et al. [5] respectively. A comparative study with existing correlation models will be extensions of this work. D. Case study for correlation function, K (d) We present the computation results using MATLAB for randomly distributed 200 and 150 nodes in 150x150m area (as shown in Figs. 4, 5, and 6) and for 30 nodes in 50x50m area (as shown in Fig. 7). The correlation relationship between nodes has been drawn by varying control parameter . If the value of K (d) between two nodes is greater then zero, then they are connected using a solid line. In Figs. 4 and 5, a node- pair with K (d) equal to zero does not show any correlation (i.e. no connected line), because both the nodes are out of sensing range of each other. The distribution of 200 nodes with = 9 (i.e. r = 4.5m) is shown with a few connected lines, it means less number of nodes are in correlation distance (see 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 x (meters) y (meters) Fig. 5. Random distribution of 200 nodes with = 12. 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 x (meters) y (meters) Fig. 6. Random distribution of 150 nodes with = 12. 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50 x (meters) y (meters) 0.024 0.0083 0.034 0.18 0.13 0.17 0.064 0.06 0.11 0.0044 0.066 0.00026 0.065 0.0034 0.011 0.16 0.011 0.0098 0.0068 0.14 0.091 0.028 0.058 0.098 0.057 Fig. 7. Random distribution of 30 nodes with = 9. Fig. 4). Given location of nodes, if we change the sensing range, more connected lines appear. It indicates more nodes are correlated with their neighboring nodes (see Fig. 5). When node density changes for given xed sensing radius (i.e. ), correlation function between nodes is also changed due to change in location of nodes as shown in Fig. 6. In Fig. 7, we see the calculated correlation function value in the middle of the lines connected between two nodes. It is clearly seen from plots that according to sensing range and position of nodes, the nodes divide into groups like clusters such that the nodes in a cluster have spatial correlation given by correlation function, K (d). In next subsection, this property is discussed in more details. E. Partition of event sensing area in correlated cells From the results discussed in previous section, we can deter- mine the number of nodes which falls under weak correlation or strong correlation according to sensing radius r and location of sensor nodes. In other words, larger the overlapped area between nodes stronger is the correlation among them. So we de ne a correlation threshold for 0 < 1 which follows two properties: If K (d(i,j)) , the node ni and node nj are strongly correlated neighbor of each other. If K (d(i,j)) < , the node ni and node nj are weakly correlated neighbor of each other. Both the above properties depend on sensing radius r (i.e., ) and node density in event area. From Eqs. (1) and (6), we can determine the correlation relationship between sensor nodes ni and nj. If the sensor nodes are highly correlated in the spatial domain, then corr{zi, zj} = K {||si sj||} (7) By using Eq (6), cos 1 ( d(i,j) ) d(i,j) 2 .  ( 2 d2 (i,j)) (8) where d(i,j) is Euclidean distance between sensor node ni and nj which is given by d2 (i,j) = (xi xj)2 + (yi yj)2 (9) Comparing Eq. (9) with equation of a circle with radius R, as given (xi xj)2 + (yi yj)2 = R2 (10) Using Eqs. (8), (9) and (10), we can determine the radius R as a circular correlation range of each sensor node ni, where node ni is located in the center. Thus, we call it as correlation region, denoted by Rcorr. Therefore, we get nal expression by replacing d(i,j) to Rcorr, as follow. = cos 1 ( Rcorr ) Rcorr 2 .  ( 2 R2corr) (11) The Eq. (11) gives important relationship in terms of param- eters , and Rcorr. It is found that strong correlated nodes are the nodes located within a circle with the radius of Rcorr Algorithm 1 Correlated cell construction Input: Graph G Output: Set of cells in Graph G v = Set of all vertices in Graph G. C = Set of all cells Rcorr = Radius of correlation region 1: function: 2: for each vertex v in graph G do 3: Q := v 4: S := empty set 5: while Q is not an empty set do 6: u := argmax {dist[Q]} 7: S := S union {u} 8: for each edge (u, v) do 9: if dist(u, v) Rcorr then 10: S := S union {v} 11: end if 12: Q := Q {v} 13: end for 14: end while 15: Construct a new cell C 16: C := S 17: v := v {C} 18: end for 19: return C = {C1, C2, ...} 20: end function of node ni. Hence the value of controls the number of nodes which are within a correlation region. Based on results obtained using correlation function K (d) and Eq. (11), Following discussions can be made. Remark 1. If the neighboring node nj falls under the circular correlation region Rcorr of node ni, node nj is in strong correlation range of node ni. Remark 2. If the neighboring node nj is outside the circular correlation region Rcorr of node ni, node nj is in weak correlation range of node ni. Remark 3. For given parameters , and the densely deployed WSN can be partitioned into disjoint and equal- sized hexagon cells with radius Rcorr. Remark 4. Since each cell formed by sensor nodes rep- resents the highly correlated region, a signi cant amount of energy saving is possible by selecting only a single node from each cell to transmit sensed data due to redundancy. Remark 5. The value of should be determined ac- cording to application requirements i.e., certain data resolution/reliability which is measure of how close the correlation is in measurements of sensor nodes. The strong spatial correlation allows a larger value of . Motivated by the above outcomes, we develop a dynamic clustering approach to exploit the spatial correlation in mea- surements with wireless sensor networks. Our solution is to dynamically group the nodes into a set of disjoint clusters such that nodes into a cluster have strong spatial correlation and hence, greater redundancy in measurements. Therefore, all the nodes in a cluster can be treated as equally, and only a small fraction of nodes (or at least one node) are required to be active for serving as the representatives to whole cluster. Without loss of event quality in measurements (i.e. reliability/Distortion), remaining node can sleep in a cluster. As illustrated in Algorithm 1, we model it as a graph G such that each nodes denotes vertex in graph and distance between an edge (u, v) is denoted by dist(u, v). The basic idea is to nd nodes (i.e. vertex) with radius Rcorr that cover more vertices which is not clustered. The output of this algorithm is a set of cells that cover all the vertices. F. Discussion Results and analysis using proposed correlation model show that model identi es the degree of correlation in information observed by sensor nodes based on location of sensor nodes. By exploiting the spatial correlation, we can avoid the redun- dant information observed by nodes. The our proposed correla- tion model can do the best by partitioning the entire event area into correlated disjoint and equal-sized hexagons with radius Rcorr. In this case, a clustering mechanism is responsible to exploit the spatial correlation in event area so that redundant transmissions from correlated neighbors can be suppressed more effectively. Exploiting the spatial correlation can be done into two phases using our proposed correlation model, as following. In rst phase, each cluster-head run the procedure of Algorithm 1 before execution of its dynamic clustering procedure. Hence cluster-head divides its clustered region into highly correlated regions according to application require- ments in term of required reliability/distortion. Then in next phase, cluster-head will select only one member node in each correlation region to remain active during current round. After correlation-based selection, clustering protocol can execute its dynamic procedure on currently selected active member nodes. For example, best clustering protocol, LEACH [9] can perform the above operation before executing its dynamic clustering on selected active sensor nodes. Therefore, entire sensor eld is represented by a subset of active sensor nodes which perform its task well. In each round, clustering protocol can repeat the above procedure dynamically, further by exploiting the spatial correlation according to immediate application requirements in term of reliability/distortion. More speci cally, the cluster- head can run above procedure whenever there is need to change on the closeness among sensor nodes (by tuning ), required reliability/distortion (by tuning ), and active member nodes due to depletion of energy of active member node. Therefore network-lifetime can be improved dynamically us- ing proposed correlation model. IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, a mathematical framework is introduced to nd accurate information about correlation characteristics between sensor nodes based on location. We showed via mathematical analysis, their results, and discussions that our proposed correlation model determines accurate correlation measure between sensor nodes based on sensing coverage. We found that the densely deployed WSN can be partitioned into non-overlapping correlation regions. Hence, a signi cant amount of energy saving can be possible by exploiting the spa- tial correlation. Based on mathematical framework, possible approaches are also discussed to design MAC and clustering protocols taking the advantage of spatial correlation between nodes. To design energy-ef cient communication protocols for WSN, we conclude that the energy can be optimized further by the adjustment of the parameters, and using proposed correlation model. In future, we will extend our work for two folds. On one hand, we will extend our work by comparing proposed cor- relation model with existing correlation models, for example, given by Vuran et al. [8] and Guoqiang et al. [5]. On the other hand, We will also use this model to guide the development of MAC and routing protocols and evaluate the ef ciency in terms of energy, latency, and distortion. REFERENCES [1] E. Shih, S. Cho, N. Ickes, R. Min, A. Sinha, A. Wang, A. Chandrakasan, Physical layer driven protocol and algorithm design for energy-ef cient wireless sensor networks, Proceedings of ACM MobiCom 01, Rome, Italy, pp. 272 286, July 2001. [2] M. C. Vuran , O. B. Akan, and I. F. Akyildiz, Spatio-temporal corre- lation: theory and applications for wireless sensor networks, Comput. Netw. J. (Elsevier), vol. 45, pp. 245 259, 2004. [3] A. Scaglione, and S. Servetto, On the interdependence of routing and data compression in multi-hop sensor networks, Wireless Networks (Elsevier), pp. 149 160, 2005. [4] S. Yoon, and C. Shahabi, Exploiting spatial correlation towards an energy ef cient clustered aggregation technique (CAG), In Proc. of ICC,05, Seoul, Korea, vol. 5, pp. 3307 3313, 2005. [5] G. ZHENG, S. TANG, Spatial Correlation-Based MAC Protocol for Event-Driven Wireless Sensor Networks, In Journal of Networks, vol. 6, no. 1, jan. 2011. [6] A. Ghosh, S. K. Das, Coverage and connectivity issues in wireless sensor networks: A survey, Pervasive and Mobile Computing, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 303 334, 2008. [7] J.O. Berger, V. de Oliviera, B. Sanso, Objective bayesian analysis of spatially correlated data, J. Am. Statist. Assoc.96 (2001) pp. 1361 1374, 2001. [8] M. C. Vuran and I. F. Akyildiz, Spatial Correlation-based Collaborative Medium Access Control in Wireless Sensor Networks, IEEE/ACM Trans. Networking, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 316 329, 2006. [9] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, Energy- Ef cient Communication Protocol for Wireless Microsensor Networks, In Proceedings of the 33rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences-2000, pp. 3005 3014, 2000. View publication stats