Northumbria Research Link Citation: Cao, Yue, Hong, Houbing, Kaiwartya, Omprakash, Zhou, Bingpeng, Zhuang, Yuan, Cao, Yang and Zhang, Xu (2018) Mobile Edge Computing for Big Data-Enabled Electric Vehicle Charging. IEEE Communications Magazine, 56 (3). pp. 150-156. ISSN 0163-6804 Published by: IEEE URL: http://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2018.1700210 <http://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2018.1700210> This version was downloaded from Northumbria Research Link: http://nrl.northumbria.ac.uk/id/eprint/31624/ Northumbria University has developed Northumbria Research Link (NRL) to enable users to access the University s research output. Copyright and moral rights for items on NRL are retained by the individual author(s) and/or other copyright owners. Single copies of full items can be reproduced, displayed or performed, and given to third parties in any format or medium for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge, provided the authors, title and full bibliographic details are given, as well as a hyperlink and/or URL to the original metadata page. The content must not be changed in any way. Full items must not be sold commercially in any format or medium without formal permission of the copyright holder. The full policy is available online: http://nrl.northumbria.ac.uk/policies.html This document may differ from the final, published version of the research and has been made available online in accordance with publisher policies. To read and/or cite from the published version of the research, please visit the publisher s website (a subscription may be required.) IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - EMERGING TRENDS, ISSUES AND CHALLENGES IN BIG DATA AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION TOWARDS FUTURE SMART CITIES1 Mobile Edge Computing for Big Data-Enabled Electric Vehicle Charging Yue Cao, Houbing Song, Omprakash Kaiwartya, Bingpeng Zhou, Yuan Zhuang, Yang Cao and Xu Zhang Abstract As one of the key drivers of smart grid, Electric Ve- hicles (EVs) are environment-friendly to alleviate CO2 pollution. Big data analytics could enable the move from Internet of EVs, to optimized EV charging in smart transportation. In this paper, we propose a Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) based system, in line with a big data-driven planning strategy on which Charging Station (CS) to charge. The Global Controller (GC) as cloud server further facilitates analytics of big data, from CSs (service providers) and on-the-move EVs (mobile clients), to predict the charging availability of CSs. Mobility-aware MEC servers interact with opportunistically encountered EVs, to disseminate CSs predicted charging availability, collect EVs driving big data, and implement decentralized computing on data mining and aggregation. The case study shows bene ts of MEC based system in terms of communication ef ciency (with repeated monitoring the traf c jam), concerning the long term popularity of EVs. I. INTRODUCTION T HE application of Electric Vehicles (EVs) [1] has been recognized as a signi cant means to reduce CO2 emis- sions, and attracted numerous attention from both academia and industry. In November 2016, the United States government announced new actions to accelerate the deployment of EVs and charging infrastructures, including the designation of 48 national EV charging corridors. The charging facilities can be installed not just in the commercial Charging Stations (CSs), but also in the public service areas such as shopping malls and parking lots etc. EVs will converge in those places and they must be served according to the well-de ned reservation and scheduling strategy [2], meanwhile without unpleasant expe- riences of long waiting time to discourage driver s comfort. Different from previous works [3] addressing when EVs should be charged while they are parked at CSs (namely charging scheduling), we focus on which CS that EVs should plan for charging while they are on-the-move during journeys (namely CS-selection). Due to the relatively long charging time, to optimize CS-selection problem has become a critical issue. Firstly, how to optimally plan charging at CS based on the EV s charging demand, will have strong impact on charging ef ciency at the CS side. This is particularly the case where a grid operator deploys multiple CSs, and aims to optimize the electricity utilization across them. Secondly, EV drivers can experience a better Quality of Experience (QoE), in terms of a shorter charging waiting time at CSs [1]. The centralized cloud based system [4] is widely applied in existing works. It normally relies on ubiquitous cellular network and real-time information for optimization. Previ- ous work [5] adopted a cloud-based Global Controller (GC) Corresponding Author: Yang Cao. Email: ycao@hust.edu.cn. connecting to all CSs and on-the-move EVs. Whenever an EV requires for charging, it will send a request to the GC for seeking the best CS recommendation, and further report its charging reservation1. The latter information is useful to predict the load congestion level at a CS. However, by seamlessly collecting data from all EVs and CSs, it is very time-consuming for the GC to achieve optimiza- tion. The complexity and computation load of this centralized solution, increases exponentially (depends on those request charging and those have made charging reservations) with the number of EVs. Moreover, the cellular network is costly and sometime is over-congested, which degrades the communica- tion quality. Therefore, a decentralized EVs charging man- agement solution is desired. Besides, delay tolerant charging reservations need ner grained control, rather than just an established connection to a large and remotely centralized GC. In this paper, we propose a Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) [6] based system which integrates big data analytics, to opportunistically disseminate the outcome from GC and collect driving big data from mobile clients. The MEC servers implement big data mining and aggregation in a decentralized way, to alleviate the size of data to be processed by the GC. This is different from the resource-consuming cloud based system, which solely relies on the GC to ubiquitously and seamlessly interact with CSs and EVs. II. RELATED WORKS A. On-the-move EV Charging Planning Compared to numerous works reviewed in [3] which in- vestigate Parking Mode, the works in [1], [5] have proposed the centralized EVs charging information management infras- tructures for On-the-move Mode, where EVs need to send charging requests to the cloud-based GC, such that the GC can calculate the optimal solution and make decision on where to charge EVs. While these mechanisms are both using the conventional cellular network as the communications infras- tructure, and the infrastructure-based mobile networks are becoming increasingly overloaded due to the growing number of EVs, other communication devices associated with their computing and communications demands. Previous work [1] has attempted to utilize additional infrastructures in urban city, via Road Side Units (RSUs) to enable the Publish/Subscribe (P/S) communication paradigm. 1The charging reservation includes arrival time (when the EV will arrive at a CS) and expected charging time at the selected CS (how long its charging time will be). IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - EMERGING TRENDS, ISSUES AND CHALLENGES IN BIG DATA AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION TOWARDS FUTURE SMART CITIES2 The cost of maintaining and extending these infrastructures is high, due to the increased geographical density of users (and also with their mobility). The increased density puts a high load on both infrastructure-based networks including wired and wireless networks. This ultimately increases the energy demands and leads to CO2 emissions, thus could nally harm the environment. B. Urban Data in Smart Transportation Smart transportation can fundamentally change urban lives at many levels, such as less pollution, garbage, parking prob- lems and more energy savings. Exploring big data analytics via an ubiquitous, dynamic, scalable, sustainable ecosystem offers a wide range of bene ts and opportunities. Most of the techniques require high processing time using conventional methods of data processing. Therefore, novel and sophisti- cated techniques are desirable to ef ciently process the big data generated from stakeholders, from a distributed manner through ubiquitously disseminated and collected information, in order to understand the city wide application in a whole picture. C. Cloud Computing vs Mobile Edge Computing The rapid growth of Internet of Things (IoT) devices and mobile applications have placed severe demands on cloud infrastructure, which has led to moving computing and data services towards the edge of cloud, resulting in a novel MEC [6] architecture. MEC could reduce data transfer times, remove potential performance bottlenecks, and increase data security and enhance privacy while enabling advanced applications such as smart functioned infrastructure. The major difference between cloud computing and MEC, is on the location awareness to support application services. This is because the cloud server locates in a centralized place, behaves as a centralized global manager to compute tasks (with information collected ubiquitously). Note that, MEC servers at different locations are owned and managed by separate operators and owners. With the collaboration among different operators, they can form a collaborative and decentralized computing system in the wide region. III. PROVISIONING OF MEC BASED SYSTEM A. Centralized vs Distributed Charging Management The centralized manner relies on the cloud server GC to advance the resource ef ciency, by taking the advantage of potential economies of scale. This brings much privacy concern, as EV status (e.g., location and trip destination) included in charging request will be released to the GC. In comparison, the decentralized manner bene ts to much improved privacy protection [7], where the charging manage- ment is executed by the EV individually. It is an attempt to betterment the speed and exibility by reorganizing the locations of users, so as to enable control and execution of a service in the local. B. Charging Planning The prevalence and accessibility of big data are changing the way people see their cities. Dedicated authorities should carefully consider which indicators were meaningful or how they should be analyzed. Here, the charging planning strategy certainly bene ts, via analytics of big data from CSs and EVs (that ideally should be captured ubiquitously and timely): CS s Location Condition refers to number of EVs being parked, with their required charging time [8]. A longer service queue implies a worse QoE (in terms of how long to stay at CS) for incoming EVs, as they may experience additional time to wait for charging. Charging Reservation at CS indicates which CS to charge, and includes the arrival time, and expected charg- ing time upon arrival at that CS. Trip Destination refers that EVs would end up with journeys. Inevitably, selecting a CS that is far away from the drivers trip destination, is user unfriendly. Traf c Condition [9] on the road uctuates the EV s arrival time at CS, and energy consumed towards that CS. The EV within a certain range of traf c congestion will slow down its speed, while it will accelerate the speed once leaving from that range. C. Communication Technologies As shown in Fig. 1, the communication technology adopted between the GC and CSs can be simply based on reliable Internet or cellular network, as they are xed network entities. However, there is a necessity to scalably and ubiquitously disseminate CSs charging availability (computed by the GC) to EVs, and collect EVs driving big data. Although 3G/LTE can be applied thanks to ubiquitous cov- erage, EVs charging requests are just on-demand while CSs condition is uctuated after a certain periods (e.g., minutes- level). Besides, EVs charging reservations are generated, only when they have charging intention. Motivated by above, the opportunistic communication paradigm, e.g., Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networking (DTN) [10] between EVs and MEC servers is desirable, which alleviates the burden of relying on cellular network. TABLE I summarizes communication technologies applicable in MEC and cloud based systems. D. Network Entities 1) Stakeholders: The popularization of EVs and deploy- ment of CSs is a classic chicken and egg problem. CSs are essential for EVs to charge, but at the same time the deployment of CSs does not make sense in the absence of EVs. Electric Vehicle (EV) which is below the Status Of Charge (SOC) threshold (a value under which the EV should seek for charging), needs to travel towards a CS for charging. As long as the EV has an intention on where to charge, it further makes a charging reservation associated with that CS. Charging Station (CS) is located at a certain location (normally with high EVs penetration), and equipped with IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - EMERGING TRENDS, ISSUES AND CHALLENGES IN BIG DATA AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION TOWARDS FUTURE SMART CITIES3 TABLE I SUMMARY OF FEASIBLE COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES APPLIED IN MEC AND CLOUD BASED SYSTEMS GC MEC Server GC CS MEC Server EV GC EV MEC Based System Internet, Cellular network Internet, Cellular network Opportunistic WiFi communication N/A Cloud Based System N/A N/A N/A Cellular network Core Networks GC (Cloud Server) Base Station Transportation Buses (MEC Servers) RSUs (MEC Servers) Far Close Location 2 Location 3 UAVs (MEC Servers) EV3 (Mobile Client) EV2 (Mobile Client) EV1 (Mobile Client) Location 1 CS1 (Service Provider) CS2 (Service Provider) CS3 (Service Provider) CS4 (Service Provider) Interaction Between GC and CS GC (Cloud Server) CS MEC Server Interaction From CS to EV Through MEC Server Interaction From EV to GC Through MEC Server EV Stakeholders CS EEATC Computing Remaining Charging Time Number of EVs Being Parked Expected Charging Time Arrival Time Traffic Condition Trip Destination CS Condition EV Charging Reservation Fig. 1. Big Picture of MEC Based System for EV Charging a number of plug-in charging slots to charge multiple EVs in parallel. Particularly, its local condition is monitored by the the cloud server GC, to compute the Expected Earliest Available Time for Charging (EEATC)2 [11]. 2) Cloud Server: It is a logical server that is built and delivered through a cloud computing platform, over CSs and EVs. Here, the Global Controller (GC)3 manages the CSs EEATC dissemination, based on the monitored CSs local condition and EVs charging reservations collected by MEC servers. 3) MEC Server: The MEC server provides a set of middle- ware services associated to applications, wherein it implements two key operations: Disseminate CSs EEATC (computed by the GC) to EVs. Enable data mining, aggregation (possible with authen- tication) for opportunistically collected EVs charging reservations. 2It refers to when a CS is expected to be available for charging an EV. 3It also schedules the amount of electricity among CSs, depending on the anticipated charging demands (identi ed from received EVs charging reservations). This operation is mainly involved in the Parking Mode use case. Envisioning for smart transportation use case, we provision three types of MEC servers: Road Side Unit (RSUs) [1] are strategically deployed for providing infrastructure support as RSUs limit infor- mation to be disseminated within a certain area, thus resulting in smaller message delay, better information security, and possibly lower communications cost. Transportation Buses [12] provide typical public trans- port services based on regular operation along a route calling at agreed bus stops (according to timetable on when and how long to stop). Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) [13] are ying aircrafts which can either be controlled remotely or autonomously. Despite the fact that relatively large UAV platforms are playing increasingly prominent roles in strategic and defense programs, technological advances in the recent years have led to the emergence of smaller signi cantly and cheaper UAVs. E. Proposed MEC Based System EV 1 CS 3 Local Computing on Charging Planning Cloud Computing on CS s EEATC GC (Cloud Server) CS s Local Condition Monitoring 2 4 Mobile Edge Computing MEC Server Mobile Edge Computing MEC Based System Push Computation Outcome to MEC Server EV Accesses CS s EEATC Push Computation Outcome to GC EV Reports Charging Reservation EV CS 2 Cloud Computing on Charging Planning GC (Cloud Server) 1 Cloud Based System EV Sends Charging Request EV Reports Driving Data 3 GC Replies Charging Arrangement CS s Local Condition Monitoring Fig. 2. Signallings Process for Charging Management All CSs are geographically deployed under a city scenario, and their locations are available for all EVs through their embedded GPS. EVs opportunistically access CSs EEATC IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - EMERGING TRENDS, ISSUES AND CHALLENGES IN BIG DATA AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION TOWARDS FUTURE SMART CITIES4 from MEC servers, make charging planning and further report charging reservations (through MEC servers to the GC). The GC analyzes the EVs charging reservations together with CSs local condition, to compute CSs EEATC. Note that, the provisioning of MEC servers would have in uence on how fast the CSs EEATC can be accessed by EVs, as well as how possible EVs charging reservations can be collected. Fig. 2 illustrates a typical procedure: Step 1: The GC periodically (with time interval T) dissemi- nates its computed CSs EEATC to all legitimate MEC servers, and get cached there. Note that the information received at the previous time interval, will be replaced with that associates to current T, to guarantee the freshness of CSs EEATC maintained at MEC servers. Step 2: The EV opportunistically encounters a MEC server, then accesses the cached information. If with a charging demand, the EV makes planning on where to charge, based on its accessed information. Step 3: The EV which is in the planned trip towards the selected CS, further generates its charging reservation. This is normally collected by an opportunistically encountered MEC server, which analyzes and mines valid information4 from collected EVs charging reservations. Step 4: At the time slot approaching (T + L), the MEC server aggregates those mined charging reservations, and re- ports to the GC once. The GC next makes computation and noti es CSs regarding their EEATC to be published at (T +L). F. Analysis on MEC Based System 1) Cloud Based System: The charging planning is imple- mented in a centralized manner in cloud system. Step 1: The EV which needs charging, sends its request to the GC, through the cellular network. Step 2: The GC makes CS-selection decision, based on the continuously monitored CSs local condition and charging reservations reported from other EVs. The decision on where to charge, is replied from the GC to that pending EV. Step 3: The EV acknowledges the CS-selection decision, further reports its charging reservation to the GC. 2) Communication Cost: Denoting Nev, Nmec and Ncs as number of EVs, MEC servers and CSs, the communication costs of MEC and cloud based systems are analysed as below: MEC Based System: The GC experiences a communica- tion cost of O ( Nmec T ) . This is because within interval T, it disseminates CSs EEATC dissemination to Nmec MEC servers, and processes (aggregated and mined) charging reservations from Nmec MEC servers. Cloud Based System: The GC experiences a cost of O(Nev) for handling the charging requests/reservations from Nev EVs. 3) Computation Cost: The computation complexity of MEC based system is scaled by O ( Ncs+Nmec T ) , as it interacts with CSs and MEC servers within T. In comparison, that for cloud based system is given by O (Ncs + Nev). 4The charging reservation of EV with an earlier arrival than (T +L) (where L is the previous time slot for GC dissemination), will not be reported to the GC. This is because the EV s charging reservation will be deleted by its selected CS, upon once parking before (T + L). G. Discussion The cloud based system suffers from privacy concern, in which the driving big data (e.g., trip destination, location) has to be released through its charging request (Step 1 in Fig. 2). In reality, it is common that (Nmec Nev), while the number of charging services is higher than Nev (meaning that each EV needs to charge more than once in long term). As such, we claim that the communication and computation ef ciency of MEC based system. Even though RSUs have been widely applied in Vehicular Ad hoc NETworks (VANETs), the deployment introduces additional economy cost. In addition to deployment cost, effectiveness and utilization of RSUs may also depend on the number of EVs that are presented in a given area. Although applying transportation buses envisions for a more exible way than RSUs, the bus mobility limited by regulated routes (only covers majority areas of a city) may degrade the coverage of information dissemination. Even if the mobility of UAVs is not limited by any route, the energy constraint is a primary concern for operating a large number of UAVs, where the interaction between UAVs and EVs leads to massive network overhead and can eventually undermine the UAVs energy (thus its average lifetime) [14]. Inevitably, to frequently recharge UAVs degrades the network connectivities. IV. PROPOSAL OF BIG DATA DRIVEN EV CHARGING A. System Cycle Fig.3 describes four phases involved in the EV charging management cycle. Driving: The EV is travelling towards its trip destination, opportunistically accesses CSs EEATC from MEC servers. Charging Planning: The EV reaching its SOC threshold, needs to make planning on where to charge. Based on its recorded CSs EEATC information, the EV locally selects a CS as charging recommendation. Upon that decision, the EV s charging reservation is also reported to the MEC server in the same way (updating is needed in case of traf c congestion). In this phase, the data from on-the-move EVs is collected. Charging Scheduling: Upon arrival at the selected CS, the underlying charging scheduling concerning when to charge EV is determined by the CS. The First Come First Serve (FCFS) is applied, that the EV with the earliest arrival time is scheduled as the highest priority. Here, the data from those EVs being parked is collected. Battery Charging: The EV is being charged via the plug- in charger at the CS, where its charging data is captured by CS. Once the EV has been fully charged, it will resume its movement and turn to the Driving Phase. B. Charging Planning Logic If with charging demand, the EV moving during journey is required to rstly travel towards a recommended CS for charging, after which it heads towards the trip destination. Intuitively, the charging planning logic aims to select one of CSs, through which the EV will experience the minimum IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - EMERGING TRENDS, ISSUES AND CHALLENGES IN BIG DATA AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION TOWARDS FUTURE SMART CITIES5 Related to EVs Being Charged Charging Planning Driving Charging Scheduling Battery Charging EEATC Computing Related to EVs On-the- move Related to EVs Being Parked An Encounter Between MEC Server And EV Has the EV Accessed Information Within (T+L)? EV Accesses Information From MEC Server Recalculate Total Trip Duration Can EV Experience Shorter Trip Duration From Another CS? Inform MEC Server For Charging Reservation Cancelling at Ongoing CS Data Mining and Aggregation at MEC Server No Yes Inform MEC Server For Updated Charging Reservation at Planned CS Yes Step-1 Step-2 Step-3 EV Plans Charging at Newly Selected CS Yes Does MEC Server Observe Traffic Congestion? Has EV Selected CS For Charging? Yes No MEC Intelligence No Fig. 3. System Cycle of EV Charging Management total trip duration: arg min cs ( T tra ev,cs + STcs + T min cs,d ) (1) This includes: Travelling time from the location of EV to a CS, denoted by T tra ev,cs. Time to stay at a CS, given by STcs. Speci cally, this value consists of the EV s expected charging time T cha ev,cs, and how long it needs to wait for charging. In Equation (2), the rst subcase implies that the EV will be immediately scheduled for charging upon its arrival, as such STcs equals to T cha ev,cs. This happens when there is still unoccupied charging slot at CS. Alternatively, if all charging slots of a CS are currently occupied, the incoming EV needs to wait until one of them is free. In the second subcase, EEATCcs (T tra ev,cs + Tcur) refers to the additional time to wait for charging, where Tcur is the current time in network. The estimated minimum travelling time from the selected CS to the trip destination of EV, given by T min cs,d . We assume that upon a fully recharged service at the selected CS, EV will start to travel towards its destination, with the maximum moving speed, e.g., speed acceleration. C. MEC Intelligence Fig. 3 illustrates the intelligence running at MEC server: Step-1: A service discovery protocol is implemented be- tween the EV and MEC server. The EV which has already accessed CSs EEATC, will not access that associated with the same T more than once. This reduces the redundant communication cost, since the CSs EEATC released from GC has not been updated. Step-2: Due to the traf c congestion, components in Equa- tion (2) are uctuated. As long as the MEC server observes traf c congestion, it triggers the EV (has charging intention) in proximity to report an updated charging reservation, and checks the tness of ongoing charging plan (by re-running CS-selection decision). Step-3: If the newly selected CS bene ts to a shorter trip duration than that of previously selected CS, the EV informs the MEC server to cancel its current charging reservation, then arranges another charging reservation at the newly decided CS. At the MEC server side, it implements the data mining, aggregation (possible with authentication) operations on the collected EV s charging reservations. V. CASE STUDY A. Scenario Con guration In Opportunistic Network Environment (ONE) [15], the underlying city scenario is based on the Helsinki in Finland with 8300 7400 m2 area, containing four main districts A-D. Every district is assigned with its own bus route as shown in Fig. 4. The trip destinations of EVs are randomly determined within the city. 400 EVs with [2.7 13.9] m/s variable moving speed are initialized considering road safety in a city. The con gu- ration of EVs follows the charging speci cation {Maximum Electricity Capacity (MEC), Max Travelling Distance (MTD), SOC}. Here, the electricity consumption for the Traveled Distance (TD) is calculated based on MEC TD MTD . We con gure the following EVs with 100 for each type: Coda Automotive {33.8 kWh, 193 km, 30%} Wheego Whip {30 kWh, 161 km, 40%} Renault Fluence Z.E. {22 kWh, 160 km, 50%} Hyundai BlueOn {16.4 kWh, 140 km, 60%} Besides, 9 CSs are provided with suf cient electric energy and 3 charging slots through entire simulation, using the fast charging rate of 62 kW. The CS publication frequency is 300s by default. 5 MEC functioned transportation buses with [7 10] m/s variable moving speed are eventually con gured on each route. Buses will stop for [0 120]s once a destination on their routes is reached. We consider a 300m transmission range for EVs to communicate with buses. 50 randomly generated traf c congestions happen within each 600s and last for 300s, while the congestion range is 300m. Both MEC and cloud based systems (discussed in Section IV) are implemented. Note that, for fair comparison, the cloud IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - EMERGING TRENDS, ISSUES AND CHALLENGES IN BIG DATA AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION TOWARDS FUTURE SMART CITIES6 STcs = { T cha ev,cs if (EEATCcs < (T tra ev,cs + Tcur)) EEATCcs (T tra ev,cs + Tcur) + T cha ev,cs else (2) G H F E CS1 CS2 CS4 CS3 CS5 CS6 CS7 CS8 CS9 D A C B CS1 CS2 CS4 CS3 CS5 CS6 CS7 CS8 CS9 Transportation Bus Routes A-D Transportation Bus Routes E-G Fig. 4. The Helsinki City Scenario based system enables a periodical (set to be consistent with GC dissemination interval in case of the MEC based system) charging reservation updating mechanism. The simulation time is 43200s = 12 hours. For charging performance at EV side, we concern the Average Charging Waiting Time re ects the average period between the time an EV arrives at the selected CS and the time its battery recharging is nished. The Average Trip Duration re ects the average time that an EV experiences for its trip, through the recharging service at an intermediate CS. B. Performance Results We observe that the MEC and cloud based systems achieve a close charging performance. This implies the the decentralized MEC based system, with T = 300s to disseminate CSs EEATC dissemination and collect EVs charging reservations, is able to achieve a comparable charging performance to that of cloud based system (requiring real-time and ubiquitous communication). Besides, a longer T from 300s to 900s degrades charging performance in both MEC and cloud based MEC (Default) Cloud (Default) MEC (900s Interval) Cloud (900s Interval) MEC (8 MEC Servers) MEC (R) 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 Average Trip Duration (Seconds) Average Charging Waiting Time (Seconds) MEC (Default) Cloud (Default) MEC (900s Interval) Cloud (900s Interval) MEC (8 MEC Servers) MEC (R) 150 350 550 750 950 1150 1350 1550 Charging Reservations Associate to CSs Number of Charged EVs Fig. 5. Performance Results systems. Due to the same reason, if reducing the number of MEC servers (1 per route, 8 in total), the charging performance is degraded. In addition, the MEC based system reduces the communi- cation costs to report EVs charging reservations, thanks to aggregation enabled at MEC servers. The data mining also helps to reduce data size for CSs EEATC computation. Previously, the mobility of MEC servers are not in uenced by traf c congestion, wherein MEC (R) is the case by bringing the mobility uctuation of MEC servers. This degrades charg- ing performance, primarily due to the inactive mobility-aware information dissemination and collection. VI. DISCUSSIONS AND OPEN ISSUES A. Compatibility to Advanced Energy System The MEC based system is compatible to advanced re- newable energy system (e.g., solar and wind powered) and advanced charging technologies (e.g., battery switch). Besides, the charging prices could be a metric introduced to shape charging behavior, such as to encourage more usage on those renewable energy sourced CSs. B. Provisioning of MEC Servers Although the concept of mobility-as-service bene ts to improved charging performance, environmental condition like IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - EMERGING TRENDS, ISSUES AND CHALLENGES IN BIG DATA AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION TOWARDS FUTURE SMART CITIES7 traf c congestion or work-off periods of MEC functioned enti- ties, would affect their activities on information dissemination and collection. Therefore, a joint cooperation among hetero- geneous MEC servers (in different locations) is desirable. C. Security Advanced secure communication is required to ensure con- dentiality, integrity and availability of information exchange between GC/CSs and also between MEC servers and EVs. Moreover, peer-to-peer based trust and reputation management system could be further explored to detect and avoid various malicious attacks. VII. CONCLUSION In this paper, we propose a MEC based system, enabled by big data analytics for EV charging use case. Mobility- aware MEC servers scalably and ubiquitously disseminate CSs EEATC and collect charging reservations from EVs. With data mining and aggregation primarily running on MEC servers, the communication costs for charging reservation making associate to CSs, while the computation complexity of GC are reduced. Such a decentralized system shows its comparable charging performance to the centralized cloud based system. REFERENCES [1] Y. Cao, N. Wang, G. Kamel, and Y.-J. Kim, An Electric Vehicle Charg- ing Management Scheme Based on Publish/Subscribe Communication Framework, IEEE Systems Journal, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1 14, 2017. [2] L. Hernandez, C. Baladron, J. M. Aguiar, B. Carro, A. J. Sanchez- Esguevillas, J. Lloret, and J. Massana, A Survey on Electric Power Demand Forecasting: Future Trends in Smart Grids, Microgrids and Smart Buildings, IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1460 1495, Third Quarter 2014. [3] J. C. Mukherjee and A. Gupta, A Review of Charge Scheduling of Electric Vehicles in Smart Grid, IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1541 1553, December 2015. [4] G. Jia, G. Han, J. Jiang, N. Sun, and K. Wang, Dynamic Resource Partitioning for Heterogeneous Multi-Core-Based Cloud Computing in Smart Cities, IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 108 118, 2016. [5] M. Gharbaoui, L. Valcarenghi, R. Bruno, B. Martini, M. Conti, and P. Castoldi, An Advanced Smart Management System for Electric Vehicle Recharge, in IEEE IEVC 2012, Greenville, SC, USA, March, 2012. [6] P. Mach and Z. Becvar, Mobile Edge Computing: A Survey on Archi- tecture and Computation Of oading, IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1 1, 2017. [7] D. He, J. Bu, S. Chan, and C. Chen, Handauth: Ef cient handover authentication with conditional privacy for wireless networks, IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 616 622, March 2013. [8] E. S. Rigas, S. D. Ramchurn, and N. Bassiliades, Managing Electric Vehicles in the Smart Grid Using Arti cial Intelligence: A Survey, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1619 1635, Aug 2015. [9] C. Sommer, R. German, and F. Dressler, Bidirectionally Coupled Network and Road Traf c Simulation for Improved IVC Analysis, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 3 15, January, 2011. [10] Y. Cao and Z. Sun, Routing in Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networks: A Taxonomy, Survey and Challenges, IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 654 677, Second Quarter, 2013. [11] Y. Cao and N. Wang, Towards Ef cient Electric Vehicle Charging Using VANET-Based Information Dissemination, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 2886 2901, April 2017. [12] F. Zhang, B. Jin, Z. Wang, H. Liu, J. Hu, and L. Zhang, On Geo- casting over Urban Bus-Based Networks by Mining Trajectories, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1734 1747, June 2016. [13] L. Gupta, R. Jain, and G. Vaszkun, Survey of Important Issues in UAV Communication Networks, IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1123 1152, Second Quarter 2016. [14] Y. Zhou, N. Cheng, N. Lu, and X. S. Shen, Multi-UAV-Aided Networks: Aerial-Ground Cooperative Vehicular Networking Architecture, IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 36 44, December 2015. [15] A. Ker anen, J. Ott, and T. K arkk ainen, The ONE Simulator for DTN Protocol Evaluation, in ICST SIMUTools 09, Rome, Italy, March, 2009. BIOGRAPHIES Yue Cao received the PhD degree from the Institute for Communication Systems (ICS), at University of Surrey, Guildford, UK in 2013. He was a Research Fellow at the ICS until September 2016, and Lecturer in Department of Computer and Information Sciences, at Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK until July 2017, and the Senior Lecturer since August 2017. His research interests focus on DTNs, E-Mobility, QoS/QoE in 5G. Houbing Song received his Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, in 2012. In August 2017, he joined the Department of Electrical, Computer, Software, and Systems Engineering, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Daytona Beach, Florida, where he is currently an assistant professor and the director of the Security and Optimization for Networked Globe Laboratory (SONG Lab, www.SONGLab.us). He is an Associate Technical Editor of IEEE Communications Magazine. Omprakash Kaiwartya is a Visiting Research Scholar at the Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Northumbria University, UK. He received his Ph.D. degree in Computer Science from Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India in 2015. He has worked as Postdoctoral Research Fellow at Faculty of Computing, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia (UTM), Johor Bahru, Malaysia. His research interests focus on Internet of Vehicles, Electronic Vehicles, and IoT use case of Wireless Sensor Networks. Bingpeng Zhou received the Ph.D. from Southwest Jiaotong University, China, in 2016. He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with the department of Electronic and Computer Engineering in Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), Hong Kong, China. Prior to this, he was a Visiting Scholar in HKUST, and the 5G Innovation Centre, University of Surrey, Guildford, U.K. His current research interests include cooperative localization and tracking, distributed Bayesian inference, wireless communications, vehicular ad-hoc networks. Yuan Zhuang received his bachelors degree in information engineering and masters degree in microelectronics and solid-state electronics from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2008 and 2011, respectively, and Ph.D. degree in geomatics engineering from the University of Calgary, Canada, in 2015. He is currently Lead Scientist in Bluvision Inc. (a part of HID Global). His current research interests include IoT-based asset tracking and condition monitoring, real time location system, pedestrian navigation, and multi- sensors integration. Yang Cao is currently an assistant professor in School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), China. He received the Ph.D degree and B.S. degree at HUST in 2014 and 2009, respectively. His research interests include Internet of Things and future networks. He has coauthored 38 papers on refereed IEEE journals and conferences. He was awarded CHINACOM Best Paper Award in 2010 and Microsoft Research Fellowship in 2011. Xu Zhang received Ph.D. degree from the University of Surrey, Guildford, UK, in 2015. She is currently a Lecturer with the Department of Computer Science, Xi an University of Technology, Xi an, China. Her research interests include networking and network management, including aspects such as analytical modeling, traf c engineering, information-centric networking.