IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 3, JUNE 2019 4049 Toward a Heterogeneous Mist, Fog, and Cloud-Based Framework for the Internet of Healthcare Things Md. Asif-Ur-Rahman, Fariha Afsana , Student Member, IEEE, Mufti Mahmud , Senior Member, IEEE, M. Shamim Kaiser , Senior Member, IEEE, Muhammad R. Ahmed, Member, IEEE, Omprakash Kaiwartya , Member, IEEE, and Anne James-Taylor Abstract Rapid developments in the elds of information and communication technology and microelectronics allowed seamless interconnection among various devices letting them to commu- nicate with each other. This technological integration opened up new possibilities in many disciplines including healthcare and well-being. With the aim of reducing healthcare costs and providing improved and reliable services, several healthcare frameworks based on Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT) have been developed. However, due to the critical and hetero- geneous nature of healthcare data, maintaining high quality of service (QoS) in terms of faster responsiveness and data-speci c complex analytics has always been the main challenge in design- ing such systems. Addressing these issues, this paper proposes a ve-layered heterogeneous mist, fog, and cloud-based IoHT framework capable of ef ciently handling and routing (near- )real-time as well as of ine/batch mode data. Also, by employing software de ned networking and link adaptation-based load bal- ancing, the framework ensures optimal resource allocation and ef cient resource utilization. The results, obtained by simulating the framework, indicate that the designed network via its vari- ous components can achieve high QoS, with reduced end-to-end latency and packet drop rate, which is essential for developing next generation e-healthcare systems. Manuscript received June 3, 2018; revised September 1, 2018; accepted October 5, 2018. Date of publication October 15, 2018; date of current version June 19, 2019. This work was supported by the Applied Computing Sciences Laboratory. The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or nancial relationships that could be construed as a poten- tial con ict of interest. (Md. Asif-Ur-Rahman, Fariha Afsana, Mufti Mahmud, and M. Shamim Kaiser contributed equally to this work. This paper was carried out in close collaboration between all co-authors. M. Mahmud and M. S. Kaiser rst de ned the research theme and contributed an early architecture of the framework. M. Asif-Ur-Rahman and F. Afsana further extended and re ned the framework. M. S. Kaiser, M. Asif-Ur-Rahman, and F. Afsana performed the simulation. M. Mahmud, M. S. Kaiser, M. Asif-Ur-Rahman, F. Afsana, M. R. Ahmed, O. Kaiwartya, and A. James-Taylor interpreted the obtained results. M. Mahmud, M. S. Kaiser, M. Asif-Ur-Rahman, and F. Afsana wrote this paper. M. R. Ahmed, O. Kaiwartya, and A. James-Taylor edited this paper. All authors have contributed to, seen and approved this paper.) (Corresponding authors: Mufti Mahmud; M. Shamim Kaiser). Md. Asif-Ur-Rahman is with the Department of Computer Science, American International University-Bangladesh, Dhaka 1213, Bangladesh. F. Afsana and M. S. Kaiser are with the Institute of Information Technology, Jahangirnagar Universisty, Dhaka 1342, Bangladesh (e-mail: mskaiser@juniv.edu). M. Mahmud, O. Kaiwartya, and A. James-Taylor are with the Computing and Technology, School of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham NG11 8NS, U.K. (e-mail: mufti.mahmud@ntu.ac.uk; mufti.mahmud@gmail.com). M. R. Ahmed is with the Radio, Radar, and Communications, Military Technological College, Muscat 111, Oman. Digital Object Identi er 10.1109/JIOT.2018.2876088 Index Terms Data fusion, healthcare application, healthcare big data, load balancing, quality of service (QoS), real-time computing, resource allocation. I. INTRODUCTION W ITH the sudden growth of electronic devices and improved connectivity of the Internet, nowadays more devices are connected to the Internet than people [1]. This has been facilitated by a concept, called Internet of Things or IoT, which was coined back in 1999 by Kevin Ashton and was meant to connect Radio-frequency identi cation (RFID) devices in the supply chain of a consumer goods manufacturer [2]. However, currently the term is used in almost every eld to describe a network of communicable devices [3], [4]. In recent years, IoT enabled devices have emerged expo- nentially and the estimated number of connected devices are to exceed 28 billion by 2021 [see Fig. 1(a)]. As a technology, the IoT has been adopted at a varied pace among different industries and sectors with their respective applications. The healthcare sector, which is slow in adopting new technologies, however, shows an incredible estimated growth and is expected to have over 50 million connected devices worldwide by 2021 [see Fig. 1(b)] [5]. Also, dif- ferent application domains in healthcare have shown varied opportunities in applying IoT and, as per the current trend, the smart healthcare products application domain [e.g., smart pills, smart dispensing devices and syringes, smart monitoring devices, smart RFID cabinets, electronic health record (eHR), etc.] is the hottest [see Fig. 1(c)] [6]. Considering the increase of life expectancy, the Population Reference Bureau projected that by 2050 the World s population will grow by 31% reaching 9.8 billion [7]. With this unprecedented growth rate, the older population (aged 65 and over) is expected to raise 16% more than the total population between 2025 and 2050 [8]. This will eventu- ally result in increased vulnerability of the aging popula- tion toward chronic diseases which is expected to account for 73% of all deaths and 60% of the global burden dis- eases by 2020 [9]. On the other hand, as predicted by the World Health Organization, there will be a distressing This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/ 4050 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 3, JUNE 2019 (a) (b) (c) Fig. 1. Global connectivity through IoT devices. (a) Global estimation of connected IoT devices by the year 2021. (b) Global estimation of IoHT devices by the year 2021. (c) Heatmap of current IoHT application opportunities. (a) (b) (c) Fig. 2. Estimated data volume generated by different healthcare applications at North America between 2010 and 2015. (a) Aggregated volume of healthcare data, (b) volume of general unstructured data only, and (c) volume of electronic health records data only. shortage of 12.9 million healthcare workforce worldwide by 2035 [10]. Hence, energy-ef cient, low cost, and scalable healthcare solutions are needed to meet the shortage of health- care workforce to support disease prevention, treatment, care, and cure. Leveraging the fast advancements in information and com- munication technology, electronic healthcare (e-healthcare) emerged itself as a revolutionary new paradigm [11]. Following the technological improvements, e-healthcare is rapidly swapping the means of conventional healthcare [12], and fostering development of novel healthcare applica- tions [13]. In this ever changing scenario of healthcare, IoT plays a key role [14] in rede ning e-healthcare as the Internet of Healthcare Things (IoHT), where both people and devices interact, communicate, collect, and exchange data through integration of physical objects, hardware, softwares, and computing devices [15]. Connecting the digital world to the physical world [16], IoHT with the help of pervasive and ubiquitous computing, and e-healthcare systems allows healthcare devices (e.g., Fitbits, sensors, Bluetooth, mobile devices, etc.) to collect health related information (e.g., blood oxygen saturation, blood pressure, weight, glucose level, respiratory and heart rate, etc.) [17], [18] over an extended period of time and save as eHR. However, the various players of the e-healthcare ecosystem generate a large amount of heterogeneous, multidimensional and multimodal data databasing which is a big challenge [19], [20]. In North America, during 2010 to 2015, the volume of healthcare data raised from 3 million Terabyte (TB) to 14 million TB [see Fig. 2(a)] [21] with general unstructured data and eHR had an incredible increment from 0.95 millon TB in 2010 to 3.26 million TB in 2015 [see Fig. 2(b)] and from 0.22 millon TB in 2010 to 2.36 million TB in 2015 [see Fig. 2(c)], respectively. In order to process this huge volume of healthcare data, systems with enormous storage and processing power are needed which can analyze the big data, thus, cloud computing was used [22], [23]. Therefore, to shape next generation of e-healthcare systems, IoHT, big data, and cloud computing needed to converge to create the IoHT ecosystem [24]. Cloud computing plays a prominent role in the IoHT ecosystem by providing ubiquitous and on-demand access to shared pool of recon gurable resources. Nonetheless, the current number of growing IoHT devices cause increasing latency ASIF-UR-RAHMAN et al.: TOWARD HETEROGENEOUS MIST, FOG, AND CLOUD-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR IoHT 4051 due to network overloading, thus, reducing the suitability of the system for real-time applications. To overcome this situation, the concept of fog computing was introduced, by Cisco Systems Inc., in 2012, which complemented the cloud by providing a substantial amount of storage, communication control, con guration, measurement and management at the edge devices [25], [26]. The concept of fog computing is to deploy cloud-like services closer to user end for local storage and preliminary data processing to reduce congestion and latency. The added exibility of computation, geographical distribution and user mobility support make fog computing appealing for healthcare related applications which require secure data transfer with low latency [27]. However, fog computing architecture may susceptible to single point of failure as it mostly depends on gateway device [28]. To further increase the response time by reducing the data traf c on fog nodes in local networks, mist computing can be used to create an integrated network [29] which bridges the IoHT devices to the virtual computing world, thus, reducing the response latency and enhancing the performance and lifetime of IoHT devices. Different data types and applications of the IoHT ecosys- tem require different processing and response times. To this aim, this paper proposes a novel heterogeneous cloud-based IoHT communication framework supported by fog and mist computing. This heterogeneous IoHT framework consists of ve layers perception, mist, fog, cloud, and application. The novelty of this architecture lies in its capability to handle separately data routing paths for different data types com- ing from real-time as well as conventional data sources, optimally balance the network load on demand, and opti- mally allocate network resources as needed. The obtained results show that the proposed IoHT framework provides bet- ter quality of service (QoS) with low power consumption and reduced latency, thus, improving the existing e-healthcare systems. II. STATE-OF-THE-ART OF IOHT FRAMEWORKS Majority of the contributions concerning IoHT frameworks have been in integrating IoT technology to healthcare sys- tems. Islam et al. [14] surveyed diverse aspects of IoT-based healthcare technologies with descriptions of various exist- ing network architectures, platforms, industrial trends, and applications which facilitate healthcare solutions in the con- text of IoT. Additionally, the trends of IoT-based healthcare research activities were examined to showcase how IoT can address various healthcare issues like pediatric and elderly care, private healthcare, chronic disease supervision and t- ness management, and pointed out different research prob- lems along with current security requirements and challenges. Through a brief discussion on an intelligent collaborative security model, the authors provided means for anomaly detection. The survey concluded with some e-health and IoT policies and regulations across the world to healthcare stake- holders better understand IoT-based healthcare technologies for sustainable development [14]. IoT enabled personalized healthcare systems (PHS) were systematically reviewed by Qi et al. [30], where the authors focused on identifying the breadth and diversity of existing IoT enabled PHS, the underlying key technologies along with their applications and case studies on healthcare, and listed future research trends and challenges. Farahani et al. [31] surveyed the existing literature on IoT related e-healthcare systems from a viewpoint of transitioning from the conventional clinic- centric treatment to patient-centric treatment. The authors discussed existing challenges of IoT-based e-healthcare sys- tems and proposed a multilayer e-healthcare ecosystem with their respective applications, such as, assisted living, mobile health, warning systems, e-medicine, and population moni- toring. Kraemer et al. [32] were among the rst to survey the bene ts and challenges of fog computing within perva- sive healthcare applications. The authors provided a summary of deployment scenarios, requirement of future healthcare and variety of fog processing tasks. Mutlag et al. [33] performed a systematic literature review of the existing technologies focusing on fog computing s usage in the eld of health- care IoT systems. The study further identi ed the aws of the current fog-based frameworks and provided some rec- ommendations toward more secure and reliable IoT systems. Ahmad et al. [34] proposed HealthFog, a fog computing- based framework, capable of successfully removing additional E2E communication costs in comparison to their counter- parts. Their framework also ensured enhanced privacy and security using cryptographic primitives. To enhance reliabil- ity of IoT architecture for healthcare, Rahmani et al. [35] combined fog computing with smart e-Health gateways and demonstrated that the proposed system is capable of coping with many challenges of pervasive healthcare systems. They also implemented it as an IoT-based early warning score health monitoring system. In addition to the studies mentioned above, other reported works on IoT-based healthcare include: emergency medical service [36], smart rehabilitation system [37], do-it-yourself solution focusing on patient oriented infrastructure develop- ment [38], smart hospital system [39], anomaly detection [40], body sensor network-based healthcare system [41], cardiac arrhythmia management system [42], and self-aware early warning system [43]. Laplante and Laplante discussed about their view on negetive effects of IoT in healthcare and show- cased an example of the dissociation between patient and caregiver resulting in loss of care [44]. With the growing amount of data, their processing and stor- age requirements also escalated. To tackle this need, the IoT- based healthcare systems were integrated into more extensive cloud computing architectures. This integration of IoT and Cloud computing has contributed toward the development of many innovative solutions [45] [47] spanning in different elds including e-healthcare. With the aim of seamless integra- tion of various remote health monitoring techniques (e.g., sens- ing analytics, visualization, etc.), Hassanalieragh et al. [48] discussed on the existing challenges related to such integration and their views on integrating those techniques in the clinical practice. Biswas et al. introduced e-health cloud, a three-layered cloud-based framework capable of mining eHR data where the network layer was designed using 4052 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 3, JUNE 2019 Rich Internet Application1-based client, the server layer with SimpleDB,2 and a logic layer [49]. Pathinarupothi et al. [50] presented a multilayered architecture consisting of IoT devices coupled with body sensors which was implemented to remotely monitor cardiac patients. The cloud HealthIIoT (Health-care Industrial IoT) framework proposed by Hossain and Muhammad [51] transmitted healthcare data securely to the cloud to be accessed by healhcare professionals, and was validated through an IoT driven ECG-based health monitoring application. Suciu et al. proposed an e-health architecture based on exalead cloudview3 which securely integrates big data analytics with cloud-based Remote Telemetry Units4 [52]. Ma et al. [53] proposed a four-layered big health application, system supported by IoHT and big data, for remote dis- ease diagnosis, smart clothing-based healthcare, LTE assisted telemedicine, and robotic interactions. Similar frameworks include: monitoring systems for chronic diseases, such as car- diovascular and respiratory diseases through IoT sensors [54], mobile healthcare systems for patient monitoring using big data analytics applied on sensor data [55], [56], heterogeneous healthcare big data analytics system for decision making in risk management and patient care [57]. The cloud can also be deployed to process and manage the IoT data online [58], [59]. Dehury and Sahoo [60] imple- mented a cloud-based service management framework for analyzing real-time IoT data. Various cloud-IoT (cIoT) frame- works have been suggested for pervasive healthcare [61] [63]. A case study of voice pathology monitoring was proposed using an cIoT model [64]. Bagula et al. [65] introduced cIoT model to prioritize situation aware patients. Hasan et al. [66] introduced a cIoT model, called Aura, which allowed mobile clients to create ad-hoc clouds using IoT devices in their adjacent environments and provided the clients full control of the range of analyses to be performed regardless of their physical locations. Many studies have been reported which utilized the cIoT model to remotely monitor patients [67] [69] using: ECG android application [70] along with other helathcare data [51], FIWARE5 platform [71], and wearable sensors (IoT) and body area network [72]. Additionally, other cIoT frameworks include: personnel altering system regarding lifestyle diseases from physical activity data [73], [74], collecting real-time patient data from wireless body area network [75], accumulat- ing physiological and healthcare data smart clothing with IoT sensors [76], [77], selecting personalized treatment plan [78], providing personalized medical diagnosis [79], supporting the physically challenged with assistive devices [80]. The transmission and processing latency is the major bottleneck for real-time handling of data in the cloud. Dastjerdi and Buyya [81] proposed fog computing along with edge and cloud computing to handle the big data generated by IoT sensors. Shi et al. [82] outlined the various character- istics of fog computing to manage real-time IoT healthcare 1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rich_Internet_application 2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_SimpleDB 3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exalead#CloudView 4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_terminal_unit 5https://www. ware.org/ Fig. 3. Overview of an IoHT ecosystem with its various stakeholders which implements the proposed framework. data. A low-cost fog-IoT healthcare system was presented which collected the ECG, respiration rate, and body temper- ature using energy-ef cient sensor nodes and analyzed those data for automatic decision making which can be given to appropriate caregivers in real-time [83]. III. PROPOSED IOHT FRAMEWORK Large scale IoT implementation results in large number of connected devices. By default, most of these connected devices are with limited processing power and resources. But, the voluminous and heterogeneous data generated by these devices require ef cient and data type speci c processing. Centralized cloud-based IoT scheme brings out an effective solution in this regard. However, solo cloud dependent pro- cessing is constrained by latency and power consumption issues which can be solved up to certain extent by intro- ducing a fog layer. The fog assisted IoT framework with smart gateways (as proposed in [35]) is an approach to enhance reliability, energy-ef ciency and performance of IoT frameworks. Nonetheless, there are still QoS issues with sensitive data transmission and there is no need to process various types of data (e.g., delay-sensitive and loss-sensitive) in each layer of a framework. An effective solution to this problem is to allow the framework to be able to handle different types of on demand data processing in different layers. This has been achieved in the proposed framework consisting of ve layers (perception, mist, fog, cloud, and application). The introduc- tion of an additional layer (i.e., the mist layer) to the existing fog-based architecture reduces data volume to be transmit- ted by the IoT devices through rule-based preprocessing of data. This reduction in data volume in turn reduces power consumption of the IoT devices, and latency (processing as ASIF-UR-RAHMAN et al.: TOWARD HETEROGENEOUS MIST, FOG, AND CLOUD-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR IoHT 4053 Fig. 4. Architecture of the proposed IoHT framework indicating different layers and possible connectivities among them. The arrow directions indicate the ow of data. well as transmission) and computational complexity of the framework. Therefore, the proposed IoHT framework is capable of selecting appropriate data transmission policies based on the disparate data sources to minimize latency; ensuring opti- mal resource utilization through delegating and delivering processes to layers with relatively less loads; guaranteeing minimal transmission delay through appropriate load bal- ancing; and assuring most favorable data-sensitive resource allocation for prioritized data transmission. The following sections describes the various components of the framework. A. Ecosystem An interoperable ecosystem consisting of diverse devices, applications, and back-end systems is essential for success- ful architectural design of an IoHT framework which will ensure undisrupted information ow for accurate and timely decision making [84], [85]. A conceptual overview of the pro- posed IoHT ecosystem is shown in Fig. 3. As the ecosystem diagram indicates, various IoHT stakeholders who reside at the outer circle (e.g., healthcare organizations and profession- als, patients, applications, and information systems) connect to their relevant counterparts to the inner circles aiming seam- less information exchange. Outer circle is the most interactive and responsive one with very little analytical capabilities. Gradually moving toward the inner circles, the analytical capa- bilities along with latency and data storage increase. So, to ensure delay tolerant data transmission of real-time data as well as big data, the proposed architecture adopts appropriate layer-speci c data transmission polices. Fig. 5. Layer-wise functionality of the proposed IoHT framework. B. Network Architecture Fig. 4 shows the proposed IoHT framework s architecture. The ve layers are: 1) perception layer; 2) mist layer; 3) fog layer; 4) cloud layer; and 5) application layer. Each of these layers has been designed with prede ned functionalities rele- vant to the IoHT framework s data transmission and processing pipeline. Fig. 5 shows a block diagram with the functionality of individual layers. 4054 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 3, JUNE 2019 Fig. 6. Flowchart of data transmission and processing taking place at different layers of the IoHT framework. 1) Perception Layer: The perception layer is the lowest layer of the proposed IoHT framework. This layer is responsi- ble for recognizing physical objects, and gathering contextual and healthcare data from devices generating (near) real-time as well as nonreal-time data. The data are mainly measured from individuals and their surroundings through small sen- sors, embedded systems, RFID tags, and readers, small to medium to large diagnostic and healthcare devices, medical and clinical imaging devices, and any data acquisition and transmission enabled devices. These hardware devices are, in general, connected to the data communication network. Besides the real-time healthcare data, there are health- care big data [e.g., structured eHR, electronic medical record (eMR), (non-)clinical/medical imaging data, unstructured clin- ical notes, etc.] which demand separate handling due to their requirement of advanced data analytics [86], [87]. In the proposed framework, both kinds of healthcare data are transmitted to speci c overlaying layer (either mist or fog or cloud) based on the data type and their processing requirements. 2) Mist Layer: To facilitate time-critical data processing, the mist computing layer has been introduced in the model. Mist computing resides directly within the network fabric and operates on the extreme edge of it with the help of sensor and actuator controllers. This layer is responsible for performing basic rule-based preprocessing of the sensor data (e.g., data aggregation, fusion, and ltering). At the edge of the IoT net- work, a fair share of the Things are with limited resources (e.g., power, communication bandwidth, and memory). Mist computing contributes to optimal resource utilization of the Things. For example, since communication consumes 5 the power of computing, ensuring required transmission instead of on demand transmission will facilitate in optimizing the power consumption [88]. ASIF-UR-RAHMAN et al.: TOWARD HETEROGENEOUS MIST, FOG, AND CLOUD-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR IoHT 4055 3) Fog Layer: One of the main driving forces behind devel- opment of the IoT technology is the necessity to process data on the y to detect anomalies, provide alerts at real-time, and activate necessary actions automatically. This clearly demands a system with high responsiveness and minimal latency. To this goal, using centralized cloud-based models are inappropriate due to their high latency. In such situations, decentralizing and delegating the processing loads on different layers based on the application s demand is needed. The fog layer forms a decen- tralized architectural pattern for bringing computing resources and application services closer to the edge, thus, reducing the response latency. As for the functional components, the fog layer supports local data storage, data ltering, data com- pression, data fusion, and intermediate data analytics to reduce disposable load on the cloud, improve system performance and QoS, and save backbone bandwidth. 4) Cloud Layer: The cloud layer is capable of connect- ing to perception layer, fog layer, and application layer. Aggregated healthcare data from fog layer are sent to the cloud layer for long-term storage, and big data and advanced analytics. Also data from nonsensor sources, such as eMR, eHR, e-prescription platform, etc. get seamlessly integrated at this layer. In order to extract meaningful insights from the heterogeneous healthcare data, the cloud layer performs various advanced data analytics including, machine learning, data mining, rule-based processing, and automated reasoning- based algorithms. However, delegating appropriate computing loads to fog layer and using cloud layer for computationally expensive operations will improve system performance. 5) Application Layer: The application layer is the top- most layer of the proposed IoHT framework. It provides user interfaces between the IoHT stakeholders/consumers and the framework itself to directly re ect the generated economic and social bene ts. Through these user interfaces various healthcare applications are delivered to the respective stake- holders. This layer also provides access subject to access rights and privileges to relevant resources from the cloud or fog layer directly to the healthcare application developers and consumers. C. Data Transmission Policy To facilitate seamless communication of heterogeneous data, a data-centric transmission scheme has been utilized in the proposed ve-layered architecture of the IoHT framework. The perception layer generates three possible types of delay- sensitive data, i.e., real-time, near-real-time, and of ine/batch mode data. In order to achieve better QoS, reduced latency, and optimized power consumption, separate transmission paths for real-time data and big data have been used. Fig. 6 represents the transmission and processing ow of data in the proposed model. Based on data traf c and resource availability, the computational loads (e.g., rule-based preprocessing, pretrained machine learning, advanced machine learning, big data ana- lytics, etc.) are delegated to an appropriate layer (either mist or fog or cloud) in the layered architecture. This resulted in different scenarios with speci c transmission paths as detailed in the following sections and shown in Fig. 7. Fig. 7. Possible data transmission and processing paths in the IoHT framework s layer stack. 1) Real-Time Data Transmission: a) Scenario 1: Many healthcare applications require data to be processed at real-time. In the proposed IoHT model, real-time data analytics are hosted at the closest pos- sible location, where the data is generated. As indicated in Fig. 7 by the red-dashed lines with arrows, the generated time-sensitive sensor data are at rst forwarded to the mist layer for preprocessing, followed by the fog layer for neces- sary intermediate analytics, and nally rendering decision to the application layer. For example, if a patient experiences high blood pressure uctuations along with symptomatic discomforts, it is necessary to process the generated data and forward a decision to the caregiver as soon as possible to prevent a possible stroke. In this case, the preprocessed data from mist layer are further processed in fog layer and for- warded to the application layer for necessary actions by the stakeholders. b) Scenario 2: The intermediate data analytics per- formed at the fog layer is not suf cient for some healthcare applications. Rendering a decision for these types of applica- tions may require big data analytics and advanced machine learning or long-term data storage for longitudinal studies. In those cases, data are of oaded to the cloud layer for the required processing, analysis, and storage. This transmission path is shown in Fig. 7 using the green dotted-dashed line with arrows. The data and the analysis results are usually stored in the cloud for further reference. Adverse drug reaction (ADR) service can be an example of this scenario. Medication for a particular disease needs diagnosis as well as patients pre- vious history as ADR is inherently generic. So, in this case, data sensed from patient s terminal are forwarded to mist layer for recognizing the drug. Later on, fog forwards the identi ed drug to the cloud, where after careful analysis of relevant eMR and allergy pro les the drug compatibility is decided and the decision is sent to the application layer to be accessed by the healthcare professionals. 2) Conventional Data Transmission: a) Scenario 3: Massive data generated from advanced medical instruments, test results, eMR requires data min- ing, predictive analysis, and other advanced analytics. Only cloud computing is capable of performing these computa- tionally demanding processing. So, in this scenario, data 4056 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 3, JUNE 2019 Fig. 8. Exemplary scenario of the IoHT framework with mist, fog, and cloud layers. The network is con gured using SDN. The AP allocates resources based on the latency and packet drop rate demand of each IoHT nodes. from conventional sources are directly of oaded to the cloud for processing. This transmission path is indicated by the arrowed blue dotted lines in Fig. 7. An example of such a scenario is that, MRI produces thousands of high resolu- tion images per examination which require more computation power and storage, and can be ef ciently served only by the cloud. In this scenario, data are directly forwarded to the cloud without any processing or holding in the mist or fog layers. IV. OPTIMAL RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND LOAD BALANCING The IoHT nodes in the perception layer collect the (near) real-time as well as nonreal-time healthcare data to monitor patients. These collected data are forwarded to the IoT hub(s) (also called access point or AP). Based on the traf c class and processing requirements, these data can be pro- cessed in the mist, fog, and cloud layers as discussed in Sections III-B and III-C. In the process of effective handling of these data, the end-to-end (E2E) delay, throughput, packet loss, energy ef ciency are crucial for maintaining the QoS of the proposed IoHT framework. To handle these heterogeneous data ef ciently while main- taining the high QoS, the network resources are to be dynam- ically allocated. To this goal, the proposed IoHT framework relies on software de ned networking (SDN), which is a pro- grammable network structure that can be deployed on the top of IoHT framework as a centralized/distributed control layer for resources (e.g., bandwidth and buffer size) allocation, scheduling, routing, and ow control through SDN controller (SDNC) [89]. As SDN ful lls the requirements of various applications and workloads through network virtualization by decoupling control plane from data plane [90], it has been considered with the IoHT framework to manage the resource demand of exponentially growing IoT devices. TABLE I TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION OF IOHT HEALTHCARE DATA A. Traf c Classi cation The perception layer of the IoHT framework (as discussed in Section III-B1) generates heterogeneous data or network traf c. In order to achieve better QoS, these network traf c are classi ed as the delay-sensitive (DS), loss-sensitive (LS), and both delay- as well as loss-sensitive (termed as Mixed ) (M) traf c. This classi cation is mainly based on transmission data rate (C) and queuing delay (tQ), and is used to priori- tize the network traf c. Table I shows various traf c classes, their service types, transmission priority (P), and exemplary applications. B. Resource Allocation In order to achieve better QoS, the objective is to reduce the time delay (tD) and packet drop rate (Pktdrop) during the transmission process. All the IoHT nodes in the mist layer achieve the minimum threshold requirement for both of these parameters through an optimal resource allocation. Fig. 8(a) illustrates an example scenario of the resource allocation problem. ASIF-UR-RAHMAN et al.: TOWARD HETEROGENEOUS MIST, FOG, AND CLOUD-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR IoHT 4057 TABLE II QOS REQUIREMENT AND CORRESPONDING RESOURCE DEMAND TO ACHIEVE THE QOS REQUIREMENT OF THE iTH IOHT NODE Consider the output link capacity of an AP is C, there are N IoT devices in a mist (see Fig. 8), each IoHT device has packet size of Pktsize. In order to ensure the QoS requirement of ith IoT device, the user requirement is <tDi, Pktdropi> and the corresponding resource demand is <Bd i , Ld i >, where Bd i and Ld i are the bandwidth demand and buffer length demand of the ith IoHT user node (see Table II). As the allocated resource to ith IoHT device is proportional to the requirement of that user, the maximum resource (i) awarded to the ith IoHT node by the SDN-based resource allocator is i = max Bi C , Li L  = max  Bd i C Bi Bd i , Ld i L Li Ld i  = max  Dc i Uc i , Dl iUl i  (1) where Dc i = Bd i /C and Dl i = Ld i /L are the ratios of bandwidth demand of the ith node and the maximum capacity, and buffer length demand of the ith node and the total buffer length of AP, respectively. The Uc i = Bi/Bd i and Ul i = Li/Ld i are the requirement to demand ratio of bandwidth and buffer length, respectively, for the ith node. Using the M/D/1 queue model [91], the E2E delay tD includes the transmission delay tTx, processing delay tP, and queuing delay tQ which are calculated by tD = tTxi + tP + tQ =  cl  fog  sen NpktPktsize C + 2 ( ) + 1 + c  (2) where and are the arrival and service rate, Npkt is the number of packets, c is the constant duration required to com- plete a job by a processor, sen refers to sensor and cl refers to the cloud. The packet drop occurs when the average queuing length E[Qi] is higher than demanded buffer length Ld i /Pktsize. Based on [91], the packet drop rate is expressed by Pktdropi = E[Qi] Ld i /Pktsize E[Qi] . (3) Finally, the resource allocation optimization problem is formulated as max  Uc 1, Ul 1 , Uc 2, Ul 2 , . . . , Uc N, Ul N  s.t N  n=1 Bn C N  n=1 Ln L. (4) TABLE III SIMULATION PARAMETERS FOR THE HETEROGENEOUS MIST-FOG-CLOUD-BASED IOHT FRAMEWORK SIMULATION C. Load Distribution In the Fog/access layer, the E2E latency can be reduced by link distribution and link fusion techniques. As illustrated in Fig. 8, a link scheduler selects multiple links, distributes the traf c to reduce the E2E delay and nally aggregates the traf c at the other end of the access layer. If the link scheduler selects M links based on the demand of the IoHT users, the link adaptation optimization problem can be formulated as max f(T, 1/Pktdrop) s.t. M  m=1 mBd C M  m=1 mLd L (5) where T is throughput, Bd and Ld are the bandwidth demand and buffer length demand of an AP. m is the fraction of bandwidth/buffer length allocated by the load balancer and is expressed by m = Fraction of allocation in the m link = Bm m Bm + Lm m Lm (1 ) (6) where = 0, if Traf c type is LS 1, if Traf c type is DS 0.5, if Traf c type is M. The proposed load balancing scheme is shown in Algorithm 1. The central SDN, as a logical controller, selects M multiple links according to traf c demand to coordinate load distribution. At the beginning of the process, network controller speci es traf c classes based on demand. For each outgoing link i the value of i is calculated from (6). For delay-sensitive and loss-sensitive traf cs, loads are distributed based on demanded bandwidth and demanded buffer length, respectively. For mixed type data traf c, load distribution is done based on comparatively greater requirement of demand. 4058 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 3, JUNE 2019 Algorithm 1 Algorithm for Load Balancing Require: Output link capacity of AP as C, Queuing buffer length as L, Bandwidth length demand of AP as Bd, Buffer length demand of AP as Ld Ensure: Distributed Load 1: procedure BALANCELOADS(C, L, Bd, Ld) 2: Initialize , , , , ; 3: SDNC selects M links based on traf c demand; 4: if Traf cPriorityClass == 1 then 5: 1; 6: else if Traf cPriorityClass == 2 then 7: 0; 8: else 9: 0.5; 10: end if 11: for all Selected Links as i do 12: Calculate i using equation (6); 13: i = iBd; and i = iLd; 14: if == 1 then 15: Distribute load to link i using i value; 16: else if == 0 then 17: Distribute load to link i using i value; 18: else 19: B = Bd i Bi ; L = Ld i Li ; and = max f(B, L); 20: if == B then 21: Distribute load to link i using i value; 22: else 23: Distribute load to link i using i value; 24: end if 25: end if 26: end for 27: end procedure D. Computational Complexity Considering the decentralized data processing capability offered by the proposed framework enables it to perform pro- cessing at multiple levels reducing the amount of computations needed at subsequent levels. This is mainly because aggregat- ing raw data from various IoT devices results in matrices with very large dimensions, leading to a resource demanding system with intolerable computation complexity. Therefore, the com- putational complexity of the proposed framework is lesser in comparison to other existing frameworks. Additionally, the proposed load balancing algorithm s com- plexity has an upper bound of O(n), where n is the number of active selected links of the network. V. RESULTS An example model is considered in this section to demonstrate the feasibility and advantages of the pro- posed multilayer mist-fog-cloud architecture for the IoHT framework. Considering, there are 100 IoHT nodes collect- ing delay-sensitive and loss-sensitive healthcare data from a hospital/home. The links between IoHT nodes (through microcontroller or microcomputer) and APs are IEEE 802.11. There are 5 fog nodes, 1 cloud server, and the link data rate Fig. 9. E2E delay of cloud, fog-cloud, and mist-fog-cloud for the simulation setting listed in Table III. The latency is minimal when all the mist-fog-cloud layers are involved in the process of data transmission and processing. Fig. 10. Increase in buffer size reduces packet drop. When buffer size increases, packet delivery ratios improve for all the layers. is 54 Mb/s. The raw data generated by these IoHT nodes can be processed using the resources available at the mist layer. When the process is high (i.e., high processing delay), the mist can of oad the processing to the fog nodes (also called fog processors). The process availability are generated randomly. Also, the link bandwidth and the queue length in the router are assumed to be distributed randomly. The fog nodes can be selected based on the demand and the processing delay. Finally, the information extracted from the mist/fog layer are sent to the server in the cloud layer. The link speed between the fog and the cloud is 10 Gb/s. The processing speed ratio of the mist to fog and fog to cloud are 1 : 1000 and 1 : 100, respectively. The parameters used to simulate the heteroge- neous mist-fog-cloud for the delay-sensitive and loss-sensitive IoHT healthcare data are listed in Table III. Fig. 9 shows the E2E delay (or latency) for the simula- tion settings given in Table III. The results indicate that the E2E delay decreases when mist-fog nodes are involved in the computation along with the cloud. However, involvement of more fog neighbors and mist resources can reduce the E2E delay as this process reduces the queuing and transmission delays. The computational latency decreases when the number of neighboring fog nodes increase. Fig. 10 shows the effect of buffer size on the packet deliv- ery rate. The buffer size reduces the packet drop. When the buffer size increases the packet delivery rates in mist and mist- fog layers reduce. However, it should also be noted that the increase of buffer size also increases the queuing delay and total latency. Thus, the appropriate size of the buffer must be selected to ensure high delivery rate and low latency. ASIF-UR-RAHMAN et al.: TOWARD HETEROGENEOUS MIST, FOG, AND CLOUD-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR IoHT 4059 Fig. 11. Effect of number of fog neighbors on the task distribution of fog/fog- cloud layers. In both cases inclusion of more fog nodes decreases the work load on the layers. Fig. 12. Mist facilitates reduction in transmission time. At different network conditions the Mist-based proposed framework showed an improvement in the transmission time. Fig. 11 illustrates the outcome of involving fog neighbors on the task distribution of fog and cloud layers. The simulation results suggest that when the ow controller includes more fog neighbors in the task distribution process, the load on the cloud decreases as the processing performance on the fog nodes increase. The load on the cloud is about 60% with one fog node, and the load drops exponentially to 37% when the number of fog neighbors are four. While evaluating the ef cacy of the proposed framework, we compared its transmission time with one of the state-of- the-art fog computing-based framework [35]. As shown in Fig. 12, the proposed heterogeneous framework (denoted by mist-fog-cloud) requires comparable or less time to transmit same amount of processed samples in comparison to fog-based framework (denoted by Fog-Cloud) proposed in [35]. The mist plays its role in reducing the transmission time while handling real-time data (i.e., smaller sample size). In transmitting 60 KB samples in different network conditions de ned in [35] (e.g., light load, medium load, and heavy load), the proposed mist- fog-cloud framework would require 1.5, 2.16, and 3.39 ms in comparison to Fog-Cloud-based framework which would require 1.67, 2.4, and 3.395 ms. The above speci ed lower transmission time is also facili- tated by the fact that there are multiple levels of data ltering in our proposed model. This reduces the amount of real-time data to be transmitted along the network, thus, reducing com- putational complexity of the proposed framework [92] [94]. Additionally, sophisticated data analytic schemes can also be employed to further reduce the computational complexity [95]. VI. CONCLUSION This paper proposes a heterogeneous cloud-based IoHT communication framework with mist and fog computing. The framework consists of perception, mist, fog, cloud, and appli- cation layers which can handle separately data routing paths for real-time as well as conventional data sources. To ensure high QoS of such heterogeneous communication frameworks, reducing E2E latency and packet drop rate are two main challenges. Through optimizing resource allocation and ow control, the proposed framework delivers improved overall QoS. Simulation results show that the proposed framework can achieve low E2E latency and packet drop rate. The obtained results clearly indicate the suitability of the proposed IoHT framework in the healthcare domain. Nonetheless, this paper can be extended by incorporating advanced machine learning techniques (e.g., deep learning) in identifying the heteroge- neous traf c, and employing bio-inspired models to ensure effective resource usage, schedule optimal ow to improve performance and increase data distribution to reduce over- all computational complexity of next generation IoHT-based healthcare systems. REFERENCES [1] D. Evans, The Internet of Things how the next evolution of the Internet is changing everything, Cisco Internet Bus. Solutions Group, San Jose, CA, USA, Apr. 2011. Accessed: Dec. 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/ about/ac79/docs/innov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf [2] D. McFarlane. (Jun. 2015). The Origin of the Internet of Things. Accessed: Dec. 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.redbite.com/ the-origin-of-the-internet-of-things/ [3] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions, Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 1645 1660, 2013. [4] M. Ganzha, M. Paprzycki, W. Paw owski, P. Szmeja, and K. Wasielewska, Semantic interoperability in the Internet of Things: An overview from the INTER-IoT perspective, J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 81, pp. 111 124, Mar. 2017. [5] Statista. (2017). Number of Connected Things/Devices WorldWide by Vertical From 2015 to 2021. Accessed: Dec. 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.statista.com/statistics/626256/connected-things- devices-worldwide-by-vertical/ 4060 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 3, JUNE 2019 [6] L. Columbus. (Nov. 2016). Roundup of Internet of Things Forecasts and Market Estimates. Accessed: Dec, 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: https:// www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2016/11/27/roundup-of-internet-of -things-forecasts-and-market-estimates-2016/ [7] Population Reference Bureau. (2017). World Population Data Sheet. Accessed: Dec. 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.prb.org/ Publications/Datasheets/2017/2017-world-population-data-sheet.aspx [8] W. He, D. Goodkind, and P. Kowal. An Aging World 2015. Accessed: Dec. 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.census.gov/ library/publications/2016/demo/P95-16-1.html [9] World Health Organization. Integrated Chronic Disease Prevention and Control. Accessed: Dec. 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.who.int/chp/about/integrated_cd/en/ [10] Global Health Workforce Shortage to Reach 12.9 Million in Coming Decades. Accessed: 26/12/2017. [Online]. Available: http://www. who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2013/health-workforce-shortage/en/ [11] A. Chehri, H. Mouftah, and G. Jeon, A smart network architecture for e-health applications, in Intelligent Interactive Multimedia Systems and Services. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 157 166. [12] O. Hamdi, M. A. Chalouf, D. Ouattara, and F. Krief, eHealth: Survey on research projects, comparative study of telemonitoring architectures and main issues, J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 46, pp. 100 112, Nov. 2014. [13] S. F. Wamba, A. Anand, and L. Carter, A literature review of RFID- enabled healthcare applications and issues, Int. J. Inf. Manag., vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 875 891, 2013. [14] S. M. R. Islam, D. Kwak, M. H. Kabir, M. Hossain, and K.-S. Kwak, The Internet of Things for health care: A comprehensive survey, IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 678 708, 2015. [15] P. K. Verma et al., Machine-to-machine (M2M) communications: A survey, J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 66, pp. 83 105, May 2016. [16] P. Sethi and S. R. Sarangi, Internet of Things: Architectures, protocols, and applications, J. Elect. Comput. Eng., vol. 2017, pp. 1 25, Jan. 2017. [17] G. Acampora, D. J. Cook, P. Rashidi, and A. V. Vasilakos, A survey on ambient intelligence in healthcare, Proc. IEEE, vol. 101, no. 12, pp. 2470 2494, Dec. 2013. [18] E. Spanakis et al., Connection between biomedical telemetry and telemedicine, in Handbook of Biomedical Telemetry. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2014, pp. 419 444. [19] A. James, J. Cooper, K. Jeffery, and G. Saake, Research directions in database architectures for the Internet of Things: A communication of the rst international workshop on database architectures for the Internet of Things (DAIT 2009), in Dataspace: The Final Frontier. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer, 2009, pp. 225 233. [20] J. Cooper and A. James, Challenges for database management in the Internet of Things, IETE Tech. Rev., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 320 329, 2009. [21] Growth of Healthcare Provider Data by Application Type. (2012). Accessed: Dec. 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www-05.ibm. com/si/ibmforum/pdf/2ndPDF/2day_ModrejsaAnalitika_1100_1130.pdf [22] M. Mahmud, M. M. Rahman, D. Travalin, and A. Hussain, Service oriented architecture based Web application model for collaborative biomedical signal analysis, Biomed. Tech. (Berl), vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 780 783, 2012. [23] M. D az, C. Mart n, and B. Rubio, State-of-the-art, challenges, and open issues in the integration of Internet of Things and cloud computing, J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 67, pp. 99 117, May 2016. [24] Y. Zhang, M. Qiu, C.-W. Tsai, M. M. Hassan, and A. Alamri, Health- CPS: Healthcare cyber-physical system assisted by cloud and big data, IEEE Syst. J., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 88 95, Mar. 2017. [25] F. Bonomi, R. Milito, J. Zhu, and S. Addepalli, Fog computing and its role in the Internet of Things, in Proc. MCC, 2012, pp. 13 16. [26] N. Verba et al., Platform as a service gateway for the fog of Things, Adv. Eng. Informat., vol. 33, pp. 243 257, Aug. 2017. [27] F. Andriopoulou, T. Dagiuklas, and T. Orphanoudakis, Integrating IoT and fog computing for healthcare service delivery, in Components and Services for IoT Platforms: Paving the Way for IoT Standards, G. Keramidas, N. Voros, and M. H bner, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 213 232. [28] How Cloud, Fog, and Mist Computing Can Work Together The Developerworks Blog. Accessed: Aug. 4, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://developer.ibm.com/dwblog/2018/cloud-fog-mist-edge- computing-iot/ [29] B. Ahlgren et al., Content, connectivity, and cloud: Ingredients for the network of the future, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 62 70, Jul. 2011. [30] J. Qi et al., Advanced Internet of Things for personalised healthcare systems: A survey, Pervasive Mobile Comput., vol. 41, pp. 132 149, Oct. 2017. [31] B. Farahani et al., Towards fog-driven IoT eHealth: Promises and chal- lenges of IoT in medicine and healthcare, Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 78, no. 2, pp. 659 676, 2018. [32] F. A. Kraemer, A. E. Braten, N. Tamkittikhun, and D. Palma, Fog com- puting in healthcare A review and discussion, IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 9206 9222, 2017. [33] A. A. Mutlag, M. K. A. Ghani, N. Arunkumar, M. A. Mohamed, and O. Mohd, Enabling technologies for fog computing in healthcare IoT systems, Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 90, pp. 62 78, Jan. 2019. [34] M. Ahmad et al., Health fog: A novel framework for health and well- ness applications, J. Supercomput., vol. 72, no. 10, pp. 3677 3695, 2016. [35] A. M. Rahmani et al., Exploiting smart e-health gateways at the edge of healthcare Internet-of-Things: A fog computing approach, Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 78, pp. 641 658, Jan. 2018. [36] B. Xu et al., Ubiquitous data accessing method in IoT-based informa- tion system for emergency medical services, IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1578 1586, May 2014. [37] Y. J. Fan, Y. H. Yin, L. D. Xu, Y. Zeng, and F. Wu, IoT-based smart rehabilitation system, IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1568 1577, May 2014. [38] M. Maksimovic, V. Vujovic, and B. Perisic, A custom Internet of Things healthcare system, in Proc. CISTI, Aveiro, Portugal, 2015, pp. 1 6. [39] L. Catarinucci et al., An IoT-aware architecture for smart healthcare systems, IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 515 526, Dec. 2015. [40] A. Ukil, S. Bandyoapdhyay, C. Puri, and A. Pal, IoT healthcare ana- lytics: The importance of anomaly detection, in Proc. AINA, 2016, pp. 994 997. [41] P. Gope and T. Hwang, BSN-care: A secure IoT-based modern health- care system using body sensor network, IEEE Sens. J., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1368 1376, Mar. 2016. [42] C. Puri et al., iCarMa: Inexpensive cardiac arrhythmia management An IoT healthcare analytics solution, in Proc. IoT Health, Singapore, 2016, pp. 3 8. [43] I. Azimi, A. Anzanpour, A. M. Rahmani, P. Liljeberg, and H. Tenhunen, Self-aware early warning score system for IoT-based personalized healthcare, in eHealth 360o. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 49 55. [44] P. A. Laplante and N. Laplante, The Internet of Things in healthcare: Potential applications and challenges, IT Prof., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 2 4, May/Jun. 2016. [45] A. Botta, W. de Donato, V. Persico, and A. Pescap , On the integration of cloud computing and Internet of Things, in Proc. FiCloud, Barcelona, Spain, 2014, pp. 23 30. [46] A. Pulia to, A. Celesti, M. Villari, and M. Fazio, Towards the inte- gration between IoT and cloud computing: An approach for the secure self-con guration of embedded devices, Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw., vol. 11, no. 12, 2015, Art. no. 286860. [47] A. Botta, W. de Donato, V. Persico, and A. Pescap , Integration of cloud computing and Internet of Things: A survey, Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 56, pp. 684 700, Mar. 2016. [48] M. Hassanalieragh et al., Health monitoring and management using Internet-of-Things (IoT) sensing with cloud-based processing: Opportunities and challenges, in Proc. SCC, 2015, pp. 285 292. [49] S. Biswas, Anisuzzaman, T. Akhter, M. S. Kaiser, and S. A. Mamun, Cloud based healthcare application architecture and electronic medical record mining: An integrated approach to improve healthcare system, in Proc. ICCIT, Dhaka, Bangladesh, 2014, pp. 286 291. [50] R. K. Pathinarupothi, M. V. Ramesh, and E. Rangan, Multi-layer archi- tectures for remote health monitoring, in Proc. HealthCom, Munich, Germany, 2016, pp. 1 6. [51] M. S. Hossain and G. Muhammad, Cloud-assisted industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) Enabled framework for health monitoring, Comput. Netw., vol. 101, pp. 192 202, Jun. 2016. [52] G. Suciu et al., Big data, Internet of Things and cloud convergence An architecture for secure e-health applications, J. Med. Syst., vol. 39, no. 11, p. 141, 2015. [53] Y. Ma, Y. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Miao, and W. Li, Big health application system based on health Internet of Things and big data, IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 7885 7897, 2017. [54] D. G. P ez, F. Aparicio, M. de Buenaga, and J. R. Ascanio, Big data and IoT for chronic patients monitoring, in Computing and Ambient Intelligence. Personalisation and User Adapted Services. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2014, pp. 416 423. [55] Z. Ji, I. Ganchev, M. O Droma, X. Zhang, and X. Zhang, A cloud-based X73 ubiquitous mobile healthcare system: Design and implementation, Sci. World J., vol. 2014, pp. 1 14, Mar. 2014. ASIF-UR-RAHMAN et al.: TOWARD HETEROGENEOUS MIST, FOG, AND CLOUD-BASED FRAMEWORK FOR IoHT 4061 [56] A. Ochian, G. Suciu, O. Fratu, C. Voicu, and V. Suciu, An overview of cloud middleware services for interconnection of healthcare platforms, in Proc. ICComm, Bucharest, Romania, 2014, pp. 1 4. [57] S. Nepal, R. Ranjan, and K. K. R. Choo, Trustworthy processing of healthcare big data in hybrid clouds, IEEE Cloud Comput., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 78 84, Mar./Apr. 2015. [58] M. Aazam, I. Khan, A. A. Alsaffar, and E.-N. Huh, Cloud of Things: Integration of IoT with cloud computing, in Robots and Sensor Clouds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016, pp. 77 94. [59] J. H. Abawajy and M. M. Hassan, Federated Internet of Things and cloud computing pervasive patient health monitoring system, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 48 53, Jan. 2017. [60] C. K. Dehury and P. K. Sahoo, Design and implementation of a novel service management framework for IoT devices in cloud, J. Syst. Softw., vol. 119, pp. 149 161, Sep. 2016. [61] C. Doukas and I. Maglogiannis, Bringing IoT and cloud comput- ing towards pervasive healthcare, in Proc. IMIS, Palermo, Italy, 2012, pp. 922 926. [62] A. Alamri et al., A survey on sensor-cloud: Architecture, applica- tions, and approaches, Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw., vol. 9, no. 2, 2013, Art. no. 917923. [63] M. M. Hassan, H. S. Albakr, and H. Al-Dossari, A cloud-assisted Internet of Things framework for pervasive healthcare in smart city environment, in Proc. EMASC, Orlando, FL, USA, 2014, pp. 9 13. [64] G. Muhammad, S. M. M. Rahman, A. Alelaiwi, and A. Alamri, Smart health solution integrating IoT and cloud: A case study of voice pathol- ogy monitoring, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 69 73, Jan. 2017. [65] A. Bagula et al., Cloud based patient prioritization as service in public health care, in Proc. ITU-WT, Bangkok, Thailand, 2016, pp. 1 8. [66] R. Hasan, M. M. Hossain, and R. Khan, Aura: An IoT based cloud infrastructure for localized mobile computation outsourcing, in Proc. MobileCloud, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2015, pp. 183 188. [67] R. Tabish et al., A 3G/WiFi-enabled 6LoWPAN-based U-healthcare system for ubiquitous real-time monitoring and data logging, in Proc. MECBME, Doha, Qatar, 2014, pp. 277 280. [68] N. M. Khoi, S. Saguna, K. Mitra, and C. hlund, IReHMo: An ef cient IoT-based remote health monitoring system for smart regions, in Proc. HealthCom, Boston, MA, USA, 2015, pp. 563 568. [69] B. Gomes, L. Muniz, F. J. da Silva e Silva, L. E. T. Rios, and M. Endler, A comprehensive cloud-based IoT software infrastructure for ambi- ent assisted living, in Proc. CloudTech, Marrakesh, Morocco, 2015, pp. 1 8. [70] J. Mohammed et al., Internet of Things: Remote patient monitoring using Web services and cloud computing, in Proc. iThings, Taipei, Taiwan, 2014, pp. 256 263. [71] M. Fazio, A. Celesti, F. G. M rquez, A. Glikson, and M. Villari, Exploiting the FIWARE cloud platform to develop a remote patient monitoring system, in Proc. ISCC, Larnaca, Cyprus, 2015, pp. 264 270. [72] T. Wu, F. Wu, J. M. Redoute, and M. R. Yuce, An autonomous wireless body area network implementation towards IoT connected healthcare applications, IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 11413 11422, 2017. [73] P. K. Gupta, B. T. Maharaj, and R. Malekian, A novel and secure IoT based cloud centric architecture to perform predictive analysis of users activities in sustainable health centres, Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 76, no. 18, pp. 18489 18512, 2017. [74] J. Park, H. Kwon, and N. Kang, IoT Cloud collaboration to establish a secure connection for lightweight devices, Wireless Netw., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 681 692, 2017. [75] M. M. Hassan, K. Lin, X. Yue, and J. Wan, A multimedia healthcare data sharing approach through cloud-based body area network, Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 66, pp. 48 58, Jan. 2017. [76] M. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, M. M. Hassan, and A. Alamri, AIWAC: Affective interaction through wearable computing and cloud technol- ogy, IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 20 27, 2015. [77] M. Chen et al., Wearable 2.0: Enabling human-cloud integration in next generation healthcare systems, IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 54 61, Jan. 2017. [78] B. Xu et al., The design of an m-Health monitoring system based on a cloud computing platform, Enterprise Inf. Syst., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 17 36, 2017. [79] H. J. La, H. T. Jung, and S. D. Kim, Extensible disease diagnosis cloud platform with medical sensors and IoT devices, in Proc. FiCloud, Rome, Italy, 2015, pp. 371 378. [80] D. Mulfari, A. Celesti, M. Fazio, M. Villari, and A. Pulia to, Achieving assistive technology systems based on IoT devices in cloud computing, EAI Endorsed Trans. Cloud Syst., vol. 1, no. 1, p. e4, 2015. [81] A. V. Dastjerdi and R. Buyya, Fog computing: Helping the Internet of Things realize its potential, Computer, vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 112 116, Aug. 2016. [82] Y. Shi, G. Ding, H. Wang, H. E. Roman, and S. Lu, The fog computing service for healthcare, in Proc. Ubi-HealthTech, 2015, pp. 1 5. [83] T. N. Gia et al., Low-cost fog-assisted health-care IoT system with energy-ef cient sensor nodes, in Proc. IWCMC, Valencia, Spain, 2017, pp. 1765 1770. [84] D. Lake, R. Milito, M. Morrow, and R. Vargheese, Internet of Things: Architectural framework for eHealth security, J. ICT, vols. 3 4, pp. 301 328, Oct. 2014. [85] M. Mahmud et al., A brain-inspired trust management model to assure security in a cloud based IoT framework for neuroscience applications, Cogn. Comput., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 864 873, 2018. [86] P. Dineshkumar, R. SenthilKumar, K. Sujatha, R. S. Ponmagal, and V. N. Rajavarman, Big data analytics of IoT based health care monitoring system, in Proc. UPCON, 2016, pp. 55 60. [87] M. Mahmud, M. S. Kaiser, A. Hussain, and S. Vassanelli, Applications of deep learning and reinforcement learning to biological data, IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 2063 2079, Jun. 2018. [88] F. Afsana, M. Asif-Ur-Rahman, M. R. Ahmed, M. Mahmud, and M. S. Kaiser, An energy conserving routing scheme for wire- less body sensor nanonetwork communication, IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 9186 9200, 2018. [89] N. Verba et al., Graph analysis of fog computing systems for industry 4.0, in Proc. ICEBE, Shanghai, China, 2018, pp. 46 53. [90] I. T. Haque and N. Abu-Ghazaleh, Wireless software de ned network- ing: A survey and taxonomy, IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2713 2737, 4th Quart., 2016. [91] M. Kaiser and K. M. Ahmed, Neuro-fuzzy selection algorithm for opti- mal relaying in OFDM systems, Int. J. Auton. Adapt. Commun. Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, p. 213, 2017. [92] X. Xu, X. Rao, and V. K. N. Lau, Active user detection and channel estimation in uplink CRAN systems, in Proc. ICC, London, U.K., 2015, pp. 2727 2732. [93] C. A. Tokognon, B. Gao, G. Y. Tian, and Y. Yan, Structural health monitoring framework based on Internet of Things: A survey, IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 619 635, Jun. 2017. [94] H. Dubey et al., Fog computing in medical Internet-of-Things: Architecture, implementation, and applications, in Handbook of Large- Scale Distributed Computing in Smart Healthcare, S. U. Khan, A. Y. Zomaya, and A. Abbas, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 281 321. [95] H. R. Arkian, A. Diyanat, and A. Pourkhalili, MIST: Fog-based data analytics scheme with cost-ef cient resource provisioning for IoT crowdsensing applications, J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 82, pp. 152 165, Mar. 2017. Md. Asif-Ur-Rahman received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from American International University Bangladesh (AIUB), Dhaka, Bangladesh. He has participated and ranked in many national and international programming contests. After grad- uating, he joined the Department of Computer Science, AIUB as a Faculty Member. He is currently serving as an Assistant Professor. He also retains real-world experience in software design and devel- opment from leading industries of Bangladesh. His current research interests include computer vision, arti cial intelligence, network security and simulation, Internet of Things, and IoNT. 4062 IEEE INTERNET OF THINGS JOURNAL, VOL. 6, NO. 3, JUNE 2019 Fariha Afsana (S 11) received the B.Sc. degree (Hons.) and the M.Sc. degree in information technology from Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2015 and 2016, respectively. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with Charles Sturt University, Bathurst, NSW, Australia. Her current research interests include e-health, data-mining, Internet of Things, nanotechnology, next generation wireless networks, cognitive radio networks, cooperative networks, and wireless sensor networks. Mufti Mahmud (GS 08 M 11 SM 16) was born in Thakurgaon, Bangladesh. He received the B.Sc. degree in computer science from the University of Madras, Chennai, India, in 2001, the M.Sc. degree in computer science from the University of Mysore, Mysore, India, in 2003, the M.S. degree in bionan- otechnology from the University of Trento, Trento, Italy, in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree in information engineering from the University of Padova, Padua, Italy, in 2011. He served for 15 years in various positions in industry and academia in India, Bangladesh, Italy, and Belgium. He currently serves as a (Senior) Lecturer of computing and technology with Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, U.K. He has released two open source tool- boxes (SigMate and QSpike Tools) for processing and analysis of brain signals. His current research interests include healthcare and neuroscience big data analytics, advanced machine learning applied to biological data, assis- tive brain machine interfacing, computational neuroscience, personalized and preventive (e/m)-healthcare, Internet of Healthcare Things, cloud computing, security and trust management in cyber-physical systems, and crowd analy- sis. He has co-authored over 60 publications, pertaining to the above areas, in leading conferences and journals. Dr. Mahmud was a recipient of the Marie-Curie Fellowship. He serves as an Editorial Board Member of Cognitive Computation and Big Data Analytics journals, and an associate editor of the IEEE ACCESS journal. He has suc- cessfully organized numerous special sessions in leading conferences, served many internationally reputed conferences committees in different capacities (e.g., program, organization, and advisory committee member), and frequently serves as a referee for high-impact journals. M. Shamim Kaiser (SM 16) received the B.Sc. degree (Hons.) and M.S. degree in applied physics electronics and communication engineering from the University of Dhaka, Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2002 and 2004, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in telecommunications from the Asian Institute of Technology, Pathumthani, Thailand, in 2010. He is an Associate Professor with the Institute of Information Technology, Jahangirnagar University, Dhaka, Bangladesh. His current research interests include multihop wireless networks, big data ana- lytics and cyber security. Prof. Kaiser is a Life Member of the Bangladesh Electronic Society, Bangladesh Physical Society, and Bangladesh Computer Society. He is a member of IEICE, Japan and ExCom Member of IEEE Bangladesh Section. Muhammad R. Ahmed (M 18) received the B.Eng. degree (Hons.) in electronics (telecommu- nications) from Multimedia University, Cyberjaya, Malaysia, the M.Eng. degree in telecommunica- tion and the M.Eng. Management degree from the University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW, Australia, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Canberra, Canberra, ACT, Australia. He currently serves as a Senior Lecturer with Radar and Radio Communications, Marine Engineering Department, Military Technology College, Muscat, Oman, (University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, U.K.). He was a Lecturer with the Faculty of Information Sciences and Engineering, Canberra, and as a Research Of cer with Australian National University, Canberra. He has authored sev- eral papers in wireless sensor networks, distributed wireless communication, blind source separation, RF technologies, and RFID implementation. He has published many papers in high level of journals and conferences. Dr. Ahmed was a Distinguished Member of the Board of Directors of ITE&E and Engineers Australia, in 2011. Omprakash Kaiwartya (M 15) received the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the School of Computer and Systems Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India in 2015. He is currently a Lecturer of computing and technology with Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, U.K. He also served as a Research Associate with the Department of Computer and Information Sciences, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K. He was a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with the Faculty of Computing, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Johor Bahru, Malaysia. His current research interests include Internet of connected vehicles, electronic vehicles charging management, and IoT use cases in sensor networks. Anne James-Taylor received the B.Sc. degree from Aston University, Birmingham, U.K., in 1980, and the Ph.D. degree in data management from the University of Wolverhampton, Wolverhampton, U.K., in 1986. She is a Professor and the Head of the Department of Computing and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, U.K. She has been active in teaching in higher education and in participating in research projects as part of national and inter- national teams. Her main duties currently involve leading research, supervising research students and teaching at undergraduate and postgraduate levels. Her current research interests include creating dis- tributed systems to meet new and unusual data and information challenges. Examples of current projects are the development of QoS in grid computing, the construction of special techniques to accommodate appropriate handling of Web transactions, the development of advanced systems for information retrieval, the advancement of intelligent collaborative systems and the use of parallel processing to improve performance in the context of a mass data environment. She has successfully supervised around 30 research degrees and has published around 150 papers in peer-reviewed journals or conferences.