Northumbria Research Link Citation: Cao, Yue, Yang, Shusen, Min, Geyong, Zhang, Xing, Song, Houbing, Kaiwartya, Omprakash and Aslam, Nauman (2017) A Cost-Efficient Communication Framework For Battery Switch Based Electric Vehicle Charging. IEEE Communications Magazine, 55 (5). pp. 162-169. ISSN 0163-6804 Published by: IEEE URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600913 <http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600913> This version was downloaded from Northumbria Research Link: http://nrl.northumbria.ac.uk/id/eprint/30501/ Northumbria University has developed Northumbria Research Link (NRL) to enable users to access the University s research output. Copyright and moral rights for items on NRL are retained by the individual author(s) and/or other copyright owners. Single copies of full items can be reproduced, displayed or performed, and given to third parties in any format or medium for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge, provided the authors, title and full bibliographic details are given, as well as a hyperlink and/or URL to the original metadata page. The content must not be changed in any way. Full items must not be sold commercially in any format or medium without formal permission of the copyright holder. The full policy is available online: http://nrl.northumbria.ac.uk/policies.html This document may differ from the final, published version of the research and has been made available online in accordance with publisher policies. To read and/or cite from the published version of the research, please visit the publisher s website (a subscription may be required.) IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTING NETWORKS 1 A Cost-Ef cient Communication Framework For Battery Switch Based Electric Vehicle Charging Yue Cao, Shusen Yang, Geyong Min, Xing Zhang, Houbing Song, Omprakash Kaiwartya and Nauman Aslam Abstract Charging management for Electric Vehicles (EVs) on-the-move has become an increasingly important research problem in smart cities. Major technical challenges include the selection of Charging Stations (CSs) to guide charging plans, and the design of cost-ef cient communication infrastructure between the power grid and EVs. In this article, we rst present a brief review on state-of-the-art EV charging management schemes. Next, by incorporating battery switch technology to enable fast charging service, a Publish/Subscribe (P/S) communication framework is provisioned to support the EV charging service. Upon that, we develop a fully distributed charging management scheme with the consideration of urban travel uncertainties, e.g., traf c congestions and drivers preferences. This would bene t from low privacy sensitivity, as EVs status information will not be released through management. Results demonstrate a guidance for the provisioning of P/S communication framework to improve EV drivers experience, e.g., charging waiting time and total trip duration. Also, the bene t of P/S communication framework is re ected in terms of the communication ef ciency. Open research issues of this emerging area are also presented. I. INTRODUCTION As the emerging key urban infrastructures, the Smart Grid and Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) have been play- ing increasingly important roles in modern cities. This enables Electric Vehicles (EVs) that are expected to be widely adopted as individual, commercial, and public vehicle eets. However, compared with traditional gasoline-powered vehi- cles, on-the-move EVs are more likely to run out of energy and need to be charged during their journeys. As a result, how to manage the charging processes of EVs to improve their drivers comfort, is a vital research issue to the success and long-term viability of EV industries. Existing charging techniques still require a relatively long duration to complete battery charging (typically, half to several hours [1]), leading to frequently overloaded Charging Stations (CSs) caused by their typically limited forecourt areas [2]. The time and efforts spent for seeking available CSs over the city, and waiting in the service queue would bring uncomfortable and anxious driving experience for EV drivers. A promising alternative approach to the traditional charging service, the bat- tery switch service [3], can replace a fully charged battery for an EV within several minutes, by using industrial automation robots. As EVs become more prevalent, their charging demands will signi cantly rise for CSs throughout the smart cities. Therefore, there is a necessity to design the communication infrastructure with ef ciency and sustainability in mind. We aim to answer the following four questions in this article: Corresponding author: Shusen Yang (shusenyang.gr.xjtu.edu.cn) 1) How to provision an ITS enabled communication frame- work for EV charging management, via techniques include the Road Side Unit (RSU), Global Position Systems (GPS), standardization of Vehicles to Infras- tructures (V2I) communications (e.g., 802.11p [4])? 2) How does the provisioning of communication frame- work affect the actual driving experience, and how cost- ef cient it is? 3) Which CS is ranked as the best plan for an EV on-the- move needs the battery switch service, to perceive the comfortable driving experience (e.g., minimized charg- ing waiting time and trip duration)? 4) What are the in uence of urban driving uncertainties (e.g., traf c conditions and drivers trip preferences) and battery switch system on the driving experience? By facilitating the battery switch service, we provision an ITS- enabled Publish/Subscribe (P/S) [5] communication frame- work, where necessary information (availability to provide the battery switch service) is shared among different EVs and other ITS entities such as RSUs. We further propose a CS-selection scheme driven by the drivers trip preferences. Throughout case study under the Helsinki city scenario, the in uence of communication provisioning and urban driving uncertainties on driving experience are studied. II. REVIEW ON EV CHARGING MANAGEMENT A. Parking Mode Majority of previous works have addressed this use case (concerning when/whether to charge EVs), where EVs have already been parking at homes/CSs. Details could be referred to [6], herein we brie y summarize these works as: Schedule and control the charging/discharging of EVs [7] (depending on different charging technologies, such as normal and fast charging), with different durations such that power grid constraints are maintained. This bene ts power grid such that peaks and possible overloads of the electricity network may be avoided. Address pricing issue [8] in order to encourage EVs not to charge during periods of high demand. This is mainly related to the economy issue, as the charging price is normally higher in peak hours, than that in off-peak hours. Integrate renewable energy, mainly solar and wind into grid as complimentary solution, from which sustainable energy could be provided to support massive demands. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTING NETWORKS 2 B. On-the-move Mode A few works have been studied to manage the EV drivers charging plans, when they are on-the-move: Route EVs (with charging event [9]) to minimize energy loss and maximize energy harvested during a trip, such that the time spent to fully recharge EVs is minimized. This would consider EV speed, as part of the ef ciency of EVs results from their ability to recover some energy during deceleration. Where to deploy CSs (providing either plug-in charging or battery switch service [3]) such that EVs can access CSs within their driving ranges. Besides, the capabilities of CSs to handle peak demands are taken into account, due to different number of EV arrivals at different times. Select the appropriate CS as charging plan (or refer to where to charge). For example, to select the CS which is not highly congested [10], so as to experience a minimized charging waiting time. III. PROVISIONING OF P/S COMMUNICATION FRAMEWORK FOR BATTERY SWITCH SERVICE In this article, we focus on the latter user case (i.e., On- the-move Mode), and aim to determine where (which CS) to charge at real time. Since previous works have not brought the bene t of battery switch technology for enabling fast EV charging in On-the-move Mode, we lead an interdisciplinary contribution, by bridging that advanced charging technology and provisioning of cost-ef cient communication to drive information exchange within EV charging system. A. Battery Switch Service To promote the popularization of EVs, it is necessary to build the infrastructure for charging batteries. Traditional plug-in recharging is accomplished by plugging EVs into charging slots (set by CSs placed at different city locations). In contrast, at the CS providing the battery switch service [3], the automated switch platform switches the depleted battery from an EV, with a fully charged battery it maintains. The depleted battery is placed and recharged so that it can be used by other EV drivers. This means that each CS is able to maintain a certain number of batteries for switch. The battery switch service could be described as a mixture of a drive-through car wash, which normally switches an EV s battery in several minutes, while without requiring the driver to get out of the EV. Note that, as the cost to the battery s lifespan may be taken into account, the fast charging still takes a toll that should be avoided when possible. The nature that depleted batteries are charged by CSs (normally via a lower power), certainly removes that burden from EV drivers to maintain batteries. B. Centralized vs Distributed Charging Management In general, the on-the-move EV charging management can be executed in both centralized and distributed manners. With the centralized manner, the charging management is executed by a Global Controller (GC) or other third party who is interested in charging management. However, this arises much privacy concern, because the EV status information (e.g., location, trip destination and ID) needs to be reported to the GC. The distributed manner bene ts from a low privacy sensitivity, where the charging management is executed by EV individually (using accessed condition information from CSs). Thus the accuracy of information plays an important role in the charging management. This is because that the CS-selection decisions made by EVs would be suboptimal, due to imperfect information acquired. C. The Publish/Subscribe Communication Paradigm The Publish/Subscribe (P/S) [5] paradigm, is a suitable com- munication paradigm for building applications in Vehicular Ad hoc NETworks (VANETs) with a highly dynamic and exible nature, e.g., Delay Tolerant Networking (DTN) [11]. The following three network entities are involved: Road Side Unit (RSU): It is strategically deployed at a certain location, and behaves as broker to bridge the information ow from CSs to EVs. Each RSU is able to aggregate all CSs condition information and caches it in local storage. Electric Vehicle (EV): Each EV is with a Status Of Charge (SOC). The EV as subscriber, actively sends query to subscribe to the information relayed by RSUs. If the ratio between its current energy and maximum energy is below the value of SOC, EV starts to select a CS for the battery switch, based on its gathered information. Charging Station (CS): CSs need to be distributed in a different way, usually in special parking spots or near shopping malls. Each CS maintains a number of fully charged batteries to provide the battery switch service. As EVs arrive, the number of maintained (fully charged) batteries will decrease because of switch. These depleted batteries from EVs may have some residual electricity but have not been fully charged yet. Since each CS needs to charge depleted batteries, its maintained number of fully charged batteries will increase. It periodically publishes its condition information to legitimate RSUs. In Fig. 1, each CS as publisher, publishes its condition information (i.e., availability of batteries for switch), to EVs as subscribers of this information. Along with this, strategi- cally deployed RSUs can support information dissemination, through the V2I communication. The provisioning of P/S communication framework well ts the distributed charging management, where EVs could access CSs condition infor- mation from opportunistically encountered RSUs (within the RSUs cloud to share all CSs condition information), and make their individual charging managements when needed. D. The Design of P/S Communication Framework For Battery Switch Service All CSs are geographically deployed and their locations are pre-known by all EVs. Each CS is connected to all RSUs using reliable channel such as authorized cellular network IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTING NETWORKS 3 Battery Switch EV1 CS EV2 RSU1 RSU2 RSU3 Cellular Communication WiFi Communication Charging Depleted Batteries RSUs Cloud Fig. 1. Big picture where EVs access periodically published CSs information from RSUs, and further utilize collected information for CS-selections. communication, and periodically publishes its condition in- formation, e.g., the Available Time for Switch1 (ATS). Given strategically deploying RSUs, there will not be an overlap be- tween the radio coverage of adjacent RSUs. Such opportunistic communication between RSUs and EVs, inevitably results in an obsolete information accessed by EVs. The information exchange between CSs and EVs through RSUs is based on the P/S communication framework. The communication in ITS enables the information broad- casting to involved entities. In the case of EV charging application, the ETSI TS 101 556-1 [12] standard is brought. Its basic application is to notify EV drivers about the CSs condition information, such that they are able to select a CS for battery switch. Further to [10] enabling the plug-in charging technology, we enhance its communication framework with additional effort to enable the battery switch, with time se- quences illustrated in Fig. 2: Step 1: All CSs information publications are synchro- nized. Each CS periodically publishes its ATS to RSUs, using the topic ATS Update de ned in TABLE I. Strategically deployed RSUs could aggregate information from multiple CSs and cache it. Note that once new condition information has been received from CSs, RSUs will replace the obsolete one cached in the past. Steps 2-3: Given an encounter opportunity with RSU, the EV being aware of updated service from that RSU, will send a subscription query2 using the topic Aggre- gated ATS Access . This normally requires a commu- nication established from the EV to RSU, via a WiFi technology enabling V2I communication. Compared to [10] via single topic for accessing CSs queuing time, we bring two desiderated topics illustrated in TABLE I and enable computation at RSUs side. Here, the basic idea is by placing light-weight cloud-like facilities (e.g., RSUs) 1This information re ects the status of those batteries being charged. For example, given that a CS initially maintains 10 batteries, as time passes the status that 7 batteries are switchable while 3 batteries are being charged, is published regarding the charging nish time (availabilities) of these 3 batteries being charged. 2It is worthy noting the subscription query received from EVs will be processed by RSUs, which only reply the aggregated CSs ATS associated to the updated time slot. Such a way facilitates an ef cient radio resource utilization and alleviated interference to EVs. EV RSU 1 CS CS Information Publication 3 EV Sends Subscription Query Information Cached at RSU 2 RSU Replies Cached Information Ubiquitous Cellular Network CS-Selection P/S Communication Framework Service Discovery EV GC CS Real-time Monitoring 3 EV Sends Charging Request 2 GC Notifies Charging Arrangement Ubiquitous Cellular Network CC Communication Framework CS-Selection EV CS CS Information Broadcasting Ubiquitous Cellular Network PB Communication Framework CS-Selection Opportunistic WiFi Network Ubiquitous Cellular Network Fig. 2. Time sequences of P/S, CC and PB communication frameworks at the proximity of mobile users (e.g., EVs moving on the road), for authentication and reducing redundant information subscription. This is motivated by the recent trend of data services towards the edge of the cloud, resulting in novel architectures called Fog computing [13]. E. Other Alternative Options In Fig. 2, we also present other two alternative options that can support information dissemination in the system: 1) Centralized Case (CC): It has been widely adopted by majority of previous works. Throughout the cellular network communication, the GC globally monitors real-time CSs ATS, and processes charging requests from on-the-move EVs. 2) Periodical Broadcasting (PB): This is a simple case where each CS periodically (with interval T) broadcasts its ATS to all EVs, also equivalent to the case where drivers use mobile phones to collect broadcasted CSs ATS. The broadcasting is through the cellular network communication, and there is no RSU involved. Each EV can de nitely access CSs ATS within interval T, different from P/S affected by opportunistic encounters. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTING NETWORKS 4 TABLE I TOPICS DEFINED IN P/S SYSTEM Topic Dissemination Nature Publisher(s) Subscriber(s) Payload ATS Update One-to-Many CS RSUs <CS ID & CS s ATS, Publication Time Slot> Aggregated ATS Access Many-to-Many RSUs EVs <Aggregated CS IDs & CSs ATS, Publication Time Slot> F. Discussion on Communication Cost 1) Possibility to Access Information in P/S: In [10], the P/S communication enabling the plug-in charging service (with CS queuing time published) has been discussed. The fact that information is accessible depends on: Whether there is an encounter between the EV and RSU. Whether an RSU (encountered by EV) has cached the information published from CSs. The analysis is based on straight road model, where an EV (with constant/average moving speed) will pass through a number of Nrsu RSUs. The possibility Pp/s for an EV to access information from at the least one of Nrsu RSUs, is given by: Pp/s 1 Nrsu i=1 { 1 [(i 1)S + F + R V T ]} (1) Where Nrsu is the number of RSUs on the road, S is the distance between adjacent RSUs, and T is the publication interval (how often the information is published) of CS. Besides, V is the EV moving speed, while F is the distance from the starting point to the center of the rst RSU. In order to increase Pp/s, we obtain: To increase radio coverage R. To increase the number of RSUs Nrsu. To reduce CS publication interval T (To increase CS publication frequency). 2) Communication Cost: Further to above, we herein de- note Nev as number of EVs in the network. Then the com- munication costs of P/S, CC, and PB are given: In P/S, the cost for information access is given by O ( Pp/s Nev T ) , since there are only ( Pp/s Nev ) sub- scribers within each T interval. In CC, the cost at GC side for handling EVs charging requests is O(Nev). In PB, each CS experiences a communication cost of O ( Nev T ) , for broadcasting its ATS to all EVs. Different from the CC communication framework, we can obtain scalability (i.e., the number of connections at CS sides does not depend on the number of EVs, as referred to PB), as the bene ts of P/S based communication against point-to-point communication. IV. ON-THE-MOVE EV CHARGING MANAGEMENT VIA P/S COMMUNICATION FRAMEWORK A. Urban Driving Uncertainties 1) Mobility Uncertainty: It refers to the situation that there are several traf c jams happen in a city. An EV within a certain range of traf c jam has to slow down its speed, and it will accelerate its speed once leaving from the range of that traf c jam. In particular, an EV may temporarily stop for a while, if it is close to the traf c central. In such case, an EV only resumes its movement once the closest traf c jam disappears. Due to the mobility uncertainty, the variation of EV moving speed will inevitably affect the arrival time at the CS, and the electricity consumption for travelling towards that CS. Further to this, the mobility uncertainty also affects the travelling time taken from a CS to EV s trip destination. 2) Trip Preference Uncertainty: It refers to the situation that, the EV drivers intention on where to travel is uncertain. Here, EV drivers may have their daily routes or Point Of Interests (POIs) to visit, e.g., shopping malls or public parks for leisure. The trip preference uncertainty affects the CS- selection, where a suboptimal charging during journey may degrade drivers comfort. B. System Cycle of On-the-move EV Charging Management Fig. 3 describes the system cycle of charging management: Driving Phase: The EV is travelling towards its trip destination. This phase is affected by both the mobility uncertainty and trip preference uncertainty. Charging Planning Phase: The EV reaching a threshold on its residual battery volume applies a policy to nd a CS for the battery switch. Based on the locally recorded CSs condition information, the EV runs a CS-selection logic. Battery Switch Phase: Upon arrival at the selected CS with parking place navigated [14], the EV s battery (electricity consumed) is switched with the one (fully charged) maintained at that CS. This happens if the selected CS already maintains a number of fully charged batteries for switch. Particularly, if the number of fully charged batteries at CSs is less than the number of EVs already parking herein, the EV charging scheduling (concerning when to charge) is based on the First Come First Serve (FCFS) order. This means that the EV with an earlier arrival time will be scheduled with a higher charging priority. Battery Charging Phase: A number of batteries depleted from EVs will be charged by CSs in parallel. They will be switchable once being fully recharged. Note that the transition between Battery Switch Phase and Battery Charging Phase is bidirectional. C. CS-Selection Logic Note that, the EV might have received aggregated CSs condition information for several times, before it reaches the threshold for requesting the battery switch. The CS-selection logic is to nd the CS through which the EV will experience the shortest trip duration, including: IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTING NETWORKS 5 Battery Switch Charging Planning Driving Battery Charging Mobility Uncertainty Is There Any Battery Available For Switch? Include The Charging Finish Time of Each Battery (Waiting For Charging) Into ATS, And Replace The Earliest Value in LIST Step 1 Yes No Arrival Time & Battery Switch Time at CS Trip Destination Estimated Trip Duration Step 5 Charging Planning (CS-Selection Logic) Step 3 Is There Any Battery Waiting For Charging Step 5 No Sort the Priority of Batteries (Waiting For Charging) With SCTF Policy Step 2 Yes Find The Earliest Value in LIST To Calculate The Charging Finish Time of Each Battery (Waiting For Charging) Step 4 CS Information Publication Trip Preference Uncertainty Return ATS Number of Batteries Waiting For Charging Decreases by 1 System Cycle Battery Switch Finished Low Battery Status Travel Towards CS Battery Charging Needed Battery Charging Finished Fig. 3. System cycle of on-the-move EV charging management via battery switch Time to travel towards the selected CS. Time to travel from the selected CS to EV s trip destina- tion. Time to spend staying at the selected CS. The rst two metrics can be computed directly, we introduce following steps to estimate the third metric: Step 1: Run at the CS side, it rstly checks the main- tained number of fully charged batteries. If with an avail- ability for switch, the ATS is returned without containing those batteries status. This means that the CS is currently able to provide the battery switch service. Step 2: Run at the CS side, alternatively, if it is currently without switchable batteries, it then checks the number of batteries waiting for charging. Here, those batteries waiting for charging are sorted following the Shortest Time Charge First (STCF) policy. This implies that the depleted battery with much remaining volume is charged with a higher priority. Step 3: Run at the CS side, only concerning those batteries already being charged, their charging nish time is included in a temporary list, namely LIST for computation purpose. Then the earliest time of LIST could be obtained, while all information in LIST is copied into ATS. Step 4: Run at the CS side, the output of LIST from Step 3 plus the charging time of each battery (waiting for charging) is calculated as the charging nish time of that battery, which is further included in ATS. Such value is also replaced with the earliest value in LIST. Step 5: Steps 2-4 are repeated, until the number of rest batteries (waiting for charging) reaches 0. Then an updated ATS is returned. Note that if the EV arrival time is later than any value in ATS, this means it would not experience any delay for battery switch upon arrival at CS. Otherwise, the waiting time for battery switch is given by The Earliest Value in ATS - Arrival Time . V. CASE STUDY We have built up an entire system for EV charging in Opportunistic Network Environment [15]. In Fig. 4, the default scenario with 4500 3400 m2 area is shown as the down town area of Helsinki city in Finland. 200 EVs with [30 50] km/h variable moving speed are initialized in the network. The con guration of EVs follows the charging speci cation (maximum electricity capacity, max travelling distance: 16.4 kWh, 140 km) of Hyundai BlueOn EV3, and we set SOC ranging from 15% to 45% for all EVs. Each CS maintains 30 fully recharged batteries at the beginning of simulation, and can charge 20 depleted batteries from EVs in parallel, using 10 kW power. The battery switch time is xed as 5 minutes. There are totally 5 CSs provided with suf cient electric energy for battery charging. Besides, 300m radio coverage is applied for 7 RSUs and 200 EVs. The default update interval (publication frequency) of CS is 120s, and the simulation time is 43200s = 12 hours. The charging management scheme proposed in Section IV is evaluated under the P/S, CC and PB communication frameworks discussed in Section III. We are mainly interested in: Average Charging Waiting Time - The average period between the time an EV arrives at the selected CS and the time it nishes battery switch; Average Trip Duration - The average time that an EV experiences for its trip, through the battery switch service at an intermediate CS; Number of Accesses - Number of times that EVs access from CSs (through cellular network or RSUs). 3en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyundai BlueOn. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTING NETWORKS 6 CS2 CS3 CS4 CS5 CS1 RSU6 RSU4 RSU5 RSU7 RSU3 RSU1 RSU2 Area-2 (4 POIs) Area-3 (3 POIs) Area-4 (22 POIs) Area-1 (11 POIs) Deployment of CSs and RSUs Point of Interests (POIs) The Helsinki City Fig. 4. Simulation scenario of Helsinki city (5 CSs, 7 RSUs, 200 EVs) Fig. 5. Evaluation results of case study A. In uence of Communication Framework Provisioning Observation from Fig. 5 follows the analysis in Equation (1), where an infrequent CS publication (300s, 600s) degrades the charging performance. This is because the accuracy of ATS collected from CSs differs too much from the value when it is published, leading to suboptimal CS-selection. Besides, setting a smaller communication range (100m) and less number of RSUs (by removing RSU1, RSU2 and RSU5) also degrade performance. This is because that EVs (far away from RSUs with certain distance) can not establish connections with RSUs, from which the ATS of CSs is less likely accessed. Here, as decision making and information monitoring are simultaneous in CC, it is with the best charging performance, however with the concern on high privacy sensitivity. Besides, PB always outperforms P/S, however with an expense of high- er number of accesses. By comparing the proposed P/S with [10], we observe a substantial improvement regarding number of accesses, thanks to the introduction of two dedicated topics involved in service discovery with RSUs. B. In uence of Urban Driving Uncertainties Envisioning for the mobility uncertainty, 50 randomly gen- erated traf c jams happen for every 300s, while its range is 300m. Therefore, each EV will adjust its moving speed, if the distance between its location and a traf c jam is smaller than 300m. All traf c jams will last for 100s since generation. Obviously, with increased number of traf c jams in the city, the charging performance is inevitably degraded. This is due to that the uncertain arrival (due to speed reduction/stop) at CSs affects the accuracy of CS-selection. Envisioning for the trip preference uncertainty, we assign four types of POIs, of which the distribution in uences inten- tion of EVs trip destinations. By setting potential trip pref- erence, the intention-driven CS-selection results in charging hotspots at those CSs around POIs (e.g., CS1, CS4, CS5). Due to an increased number of EVs intend to switch batteries at IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTING NETWORKS 7 these CSs, the average charging waiting time and trip duration are increased while the distribution of charged EVs among CSs changes. We observe that the mobility uncertainty does not remarkably result in charging hotspots, in sharp contrast to that under the trip preference uncertainty. C. In uence of Charging System Given the reduction of fully recharged batteries maintained at CSs, EVs have to wait for a longer time to get batteries switched and their total trip duration is increased. Besides, the performance becomes worse, if charging depleted batteries using the First Deplete First Charge (FDFC) rather than STCF policy. This implies the importance of providing a fast availability of switchable batteries. Finally, the advantage of battery switch over plug-in charg- ing technology is observed given 10 kW charging power. The former with 60 kW charging power can eventually achieve a close performance of the latter. This re ects a realistic concern, from which the battery switch system can alleviate the peak load in power grid, by running a lower charging power. VI. OPEN RESEARCH ISSUES A. Heterogeneity of EVs There have been many EV manufacturers, and each type of EV may only be compatible with one or a few types of batteries. Assuming each CS maintains different types of batteries, it then publishes the integrated information about distinguished ATS (in relation to a certain type of battery). Besides, the underlying battery scheduling policy should adjust the availability of each type of battery, depending on demands from heterogeneous EVs.. B. Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) Operation The CSs providing battery switch services can operate either as an energy source when their maintained batteries are fully charged, or as an electrical load when the depleted batteries need to be charged. The residual electricity of depleted batter- ies from EVs could be sold back to grid. Instead, enabling the battery switch service in V2G operation, bene ts both drivers and grid, because of short EVs idle time at CS as well as exibility of controlling those depleted batteries. C. Business Model Apart from strategically deploying CSs and V2G operation, the number of batteries to maintain at each CS should be decided, prior to knowing the future demand for batteries switch. Following our results, more batteries should be main- tained at CSs which are in proximity to potential drivers POIs. A dynamic pricing strategy to minimize congestion and maximize pro t (by adjusting the switch price) is suggested. D. Security Malicious business may bombard an individual EV with unsolicited product or service, e.g., attracting drivers using manipulated CSs condition information. As such, security is required to maintain con dentiality, integrity and availability of information exchange between CSs and EVs. The credibility of CSs ATS is required for the hazard-free decision of EVs. Thus, all messages must be digitally signed by CSs and later can be veri ed by EVs before making their CS-selection decisions. VII. CONCLUSION The effort towards green communication and charging system for EVs on-the-move has become important. Here, a cost ef cient P/S communication framework enabling the battery switch service is provisioned to manage on-the-move EV charging, aiming to accelerate the charging process than traditional plug-in charging technology. Results of city-scale simulations demonstrate that a number of factors have the impact on the driving experience, through the battery switch services. Open research issues have also been discussed. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work is supported by the NSFC 61372114 and NSFC 61631005, and the Beijing Nova Program Z151100000315077. REFERENCES [1] A. Boulanger, A. Chu, S. Maxx, and D. Waltz, Vehicle Electri cation: Status and Issues, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, no. 6, pp. 1116 1138, June, 2011. [2] E. Rigas, S. Ramchurn, and N. Bassiliades, Managing Electric Vehicles in the Smart Grid Using Arti cial Intelligence: A Survey, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1619 1635, August, 2015. [3] F. Pan, R. Bent, A. Berscheid, and D. Izraelevitz, Locating PHEV Exchange Stations in V2G, in IEEE SmartGridComm 10, Maryland, USA, October 2010. [4] J. Gozalvez, M. Sepulcre, and R. Bauza, IEEE 802.11p Vehicle to Infrastructure Communications in Urban Environments, IEEE Commu- nications Magazine, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 176 183, May, 2012. [5] P. T. Eugster, P. A. Felber, R. Guerraoui, and A.-M. Kermarrec, The Many Faces of Publish/Subscribe, ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 114 131, June, 2003. [6] J. C. Mukherjee and A. Gupta, A Review of Charge Scheduling of Electric Vehicles in Smart Grid, IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1541 1553, Dec 2015. [7] R. Wang, P. Wang, and G. Xiao, Two-stage mechanism for massive electric vehicle charging involving renewable energy, IEEE Transac- tions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 4159 4171, June 2016. [8] W. Lee, L. Xiang, R. Schober, and V. W. Wong, Electric Vehicle Charg- ing Stations With Renewable Power Generators: A Game Theoretical Analysis, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 608 617, 2015. [9] T. Sweda and D. Klabjan, Finding Minimum-Cost Paths for Electric Vehicles, in IEEE IEVC 12, March, 2012. [10] Y. Cao, N. Wang, G. Kamel, and Y.-J. Kim, An Electric Vehicle Charg- ing Management Scheme Based on Publish/Subscribe Communication Framework, IEEE Systems Journal, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1 14, 2015. [11] Y. Cao and Z. Sun, Routing in Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networks: A Taxonomy, Survey and Challenges, IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 654 677, Second Quarter, 2013. [12] ETSI TS 101 556-1 v1.1.1 Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Infras- tructure to Vehicle Communication; Part 1: Electric Vehicle Charging Spot Noti cation Speci cation, Tech. Rep. [13] M. Chiang and T. Zhang, Fog and IoT: An Overview of Research Opportunities, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1 1, 2016. IEEE COMMUNICATIONS MAGAZINE - GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTING NETWORKS 8 [14] O. Kaiwartya, A. H. Abdullah, Y. Cao, R. S. Raw, S. Kumar, D. K. Lobiyal, I. F. Isnin, X. Liu, and R. R. Shah, T-MQM: Testbed-Based Multi-Metric Quality Measurement of Sensor Deployment for Precision Agriculture - A Case Study, IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 23, pp. 8649 8664, Dec 2016. [15] A. Ker anen, J. Ott, and T. K arkk ainen, The ONE Simulator for DTN Protocol Evaluation, in ICST SIMUTools 09, Rome, Italy, March, 2009. BIOGRAPHIES Yue Cao received his PhD degree from the Institute for Communication Systems (ICS) formerly known as Centre for Communication Systems Research, at University of Surrey, Guildford, UK in 2013. Further to his PhD study, he was a Research Fellow at the ICS. Since October 2016, he has been the Lecturer in Department of Computer and Information Sciences, at Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. His research interests focus on Delay/Disruption Tolerant Networks, Electric Vehicle (EV) charging management, Information Centric Networking (ICN), Device-to-Device (D2D) communication and Mobile Edge Computing (MEC). Shusen Yang received his PhD in Computing from Imperial College London in 2013. He is currently a professor in the Institute of Information and System Science at Xi an JiaoTong University (XJTU). Before joining XJTU, Shusen was a Lecturer at University of Liverpool from 2015 to 2016, and a Research Associate at Intel Collaborative Research Institute (ICRI) from 2013 to 2014. Shusen is a recipient of China 1000 Young Talents Program , and an honorary research fellow at Imperial College London. He is a senior member of IEEE and a member of ACM. Geyong Min is a Professor of High Performance Computing and Networking in the Department of Mathematics and Computer Science at the University of Exeter, UK. He received the PhD degree in Computing Science from the University of Glasgow, UK, in 2003. His research interests include Future Internet, Computer Networks, Wireless Communications, Multimedia Systems, Information Security, High Performance Computing, Ubiquitous Computing, Modelling and Performance Engineering. Xing Zhang is Full Professor with the School of Information and Communications Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), China. His research interests are mainly in 5G wireless communications and networks, green communications, cognitive radio and cooperative communications, big data and Internet of Things. He is the author/coauthor of two technical books and more than 100 papers in top journals and international conferences and led more than 30 patents. Prof. Zhang has served as General Co-Chairs of the 3rd IEEE International Conference on Smart Data (SmartData-2017), as a TPC Co-chair/TPC member for a number of major international conferences. He received the Best Paper Awards in the 9th International Conference on Communications and Networking in China (Chinacom 2014), the 17th International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC 2014), and the 8th IEEE International Conference on Wireless Communications and Signal Processing (IEEE WCSP 2016). He is a Senior Member of IEEE and IEEE ComSoc, Member of CCF. Houbing Song received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, in August 2012. In August 2012, he joined the Depart- ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, West Virginia University, Montgomery, WV, where he is currently the Goden Bear Scholar and an Assistant Professor and the Founding Director of the Security and Optimization for Networked Globe Laboratory (SONG Lab, www.SONGLab.us). His research interests lie in the areas of cyber-physical systems, internet of things, edge computing, big data analytics, and communications and networking. Omprakash Kaiwartya received his Ph.D. degree in Computer Science from School of Computer and Systems Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India in 2015. He is currently a Post-Doc Research Fellow at Faculty of Computing, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia (UTM), Johor Bahru, Malaysia. His research interests include Vehicular Ad-hoc Networks, Mobile Ad-hoc Networks and Wireless Sensor Networks. Nauman Aslam is a Reader in Department of Computer and Information Sciences, at Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. He received PhD in Engineering Mathematics from Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada in 2008. Prior to joining Northumbria University, he worked as an Assistant Professor at Dalhousie University, Canada from 2008 - 2011. Currently, he also holds an adjunct assistant professor position at Dalhousie university. His research interests include wireless ad hoc and sensor networks, fault tolerant and reliable communication, remote health monitoring application.