Article Use of Information Communication Technology by Medical Educators Amid COVID-19 Pandemic and Beyond Ipshita Chatterjee1 and Pinaki Chakraborty2 Abstract The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted life and all forms of education. However, the impact on medical education is unique since the need for continuity of training medical students is urgent and traditionally calls for hands-on training and a physical presence. This is further compounded by the unavailability of teachers who are also serving as frontline health-care providers in the pandemic. This article discusses the role and types of information communication technology (ICT) tools in filling the gaps and ensuring educational continuity in medical education, collaboration, and learning, across the world in the current scenario. A variety of online collaboration tools and digital interventions are discussed. A comparison between the various ICT tools being used by medical educators is also presented. The potential and corre- sponding challenges of revamping the medical education system and incorporating ICT tools in the long run have also been discussed. Our work can serve as the basis of further studies on creating digital educational models in medical education. 1Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom 2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Netaji Subhas University of Technology, New Delhi, India Corresponding Author: Ipshita Chatterjee, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom. Email: ipshita.chatterjee@wolfson.ox.ac.uk Journal of Educational Technology Systems ! The Author(s) 2020 Article reuse guidelines: sagepub.com/journals-permissions DOI: 10.1177/0047239520966996 journals.sagepub.com/home/ets 2021, Vol. 49(3) 310 324 Keywords medical education, information and communication technology, e-learning, live streamed lecture, COVID-19 Impact of COVID-19 on Medical Education The COVID-19 pandemic has deeply impacted all spheres of education, espe- cially with social distancing norms in place (Dhawan, 2020). Medical education, however, is uniquely affected as the need for training future health-care pro- viders has assumed paramount importance, in the light of the global emergency (Rose, 2020). This impact is compounded by the unavailability of teachers (Marasco et al., 2020) in these unique circumstances. Since medical educators play the dual role of health-care providers, who are being called upon to discharge their duties in the service of the community, leading to a disruption in medical training. Prepandemic medical education, for the rst 12 to 18 months in the preclerk- ship curriculum, required students to physically convene in small groups for problem-solving collaborations. The nal 18 months presented an individualized trajectory in advanced clinical rotations in the clerkship environment. The phys- ical presence of students in inpatient and outpatient environments is a critical component in medical education and the clerkship curriculum, which is greatly impacted by the limitations in in-person gatherings presented by the COVID-19 pandemic. Social distancing norms, requiring limiting in-person gathering, have led to a cancellation in in-person teaching, conferences, and simulation laboratories. In addition, movement between sites even within the same institution poses the risk to patients, residents, and other health-care providers alike. Patients have been advised to postpone nonessential hospital visits and surgeries. Directives to avoid nonessential personnel at sites and minimization of essential personnel during surgeries have led to a reduced case volume for residents (Chick et al., 2020). The reduced patient volume has reduced the opportunity for postgraduate medical students to perform inpatient medical procedures and gain expertise in a broad spectrum of cases (Edigin et al., 2020). Consequently, clinical rotations for surgical residents have seen a signi cant decline, deferral, or even cancellation. The impact is also manifested in the form of cancellation of clinical clerkships and collaborative activities of many medical students (Ferrel & Ryan, 2020). The disruption in medical education is dramatic and without a clear end- point, in a time where training medical students is of paramount importance in the light of a global emergency. While rst-hand training in medical education is essential, information technology tools including prerecorded and live streamed 311 Chatterjee and Chakraborty lectures, simulation tools, online collaboration, and discussion platforms are helping ll in numerous other gaps in medical training during the COVID-19 pandemic and ensure educational continuity for the next generation of health- care professionals. Interventions Kachra and Brown (2020) aptly remarked that the COVID-19 pandemic has moved medical students out of the clinical environment, redistributed residents across the health-care system and shifted medical education online. In response to COVID-19, medical education faculty have rapidly transitioned the entire preclerkship curriculum online (Chick et al., 2020; Rose, 2020), arranging for smaller groups to convene in virtual team settings. Medical educators are using a wide range of information and communication technology (ICT) tools to ensure the continuity of medical education amid the pandemic. It may be noted that many of the teachers and students are also involved in patient care. Nevertheless, a quick literature survey reveals that med- ical educators are using ICT for teaching more effectively than professors of other disciplines (Table 1). Most medical educators are disseminating study materials through university websites and online collaboration tools (Aghakhani & Shalbafan, 2020; Almarzooq et al., 2020; Ashokka et al., 2020; Czepczynski & Kunikowska, 2020; Rasmussen et al., 2020). Online collaboration tools and social media are the popular choice among teachers and students over university websites, being convenient and more inter- active than university websites and allowing for collaborative discussions on topics in medicine and surgery. Facebook groups are being used for hosting such discussions (Chick et al., 2020). Whatsapp is also a popular medium of facilitation of case-based discussion (Hughes et al., 2020). Social media-based live streaming services such as Instagram live (Abi-Rafeh et al., 2019) are also providing avenues for live training for surgery trainees and discussion with mentors and peers. The usage of teleconferencing and audience response meth- ods is being encouraged to promote student participation during the lesson (Alvin et al., 2020). Video conferencing and collaboration tools are allowing surgical handover rounds and educational sessions to be accessible to the gen- eral surgeon community at large, providing a collaborative space for reviewing pandemic-related literature and updates (Hintz et al., 2020). Social media plat- forms such as LinkedIn and Twitter are enabling physicians to continue profes- sional advancement on a personal level as well as continuing to engage with and educate peers, patients, and the community at large (Ricciardi et al., 2020). Attending lectures delivered by professors is an important part of education in any discipline. Some medical educators are now sharing their prerecorded lectures with students, while most others prefer live streaming their lectures. Students can ask questions during live-streamed lectures via a chat response 312 Journal of Educational Technology Systems 49(3 ) Table 1. ICT Tools and Pedagogical Approach Being Used in Different Medical Schools. Medical school(s) ICT tools used Pedagogical approach Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark (Rasmussen et al., 2020) Online collaboration platform Shifted regular teaching to an online platform and offered fast-track courses in ventilator therapy and nursing assistance. Undergraduate and graduate medical students started volunteering in pandemic emergency departments Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA (Almarzooq et al., 2020) Online collaboration platform, videoconferencing Developed an online learning environment for the cardiology fellow in-training program. Using the environment for discussions, sharing research literature, and polling during lectures. Sessions are recorded and can be revisited. Brooke Army Medical Center, San Antonio, TX, USA (Chick et al., 2020) Prerecorded lectures, videoconferencing, Facebook group Using flipped classroom model for surgical residents. Study materials are dis- tributed among students in advance and critically discussed during online meetings. The meetings are recorded and can be revisited. A closed Facebook group was created. Teachers post practice questions in the group and students answer them. The group is also used for discussing topics related to surgery Imperial College London, London, UK (Mian & Khan, 2020) Videoconferencing Teachers deliver lectures through videoconferencing often from hospital sites. Students attend the lectures and interact with the teachers University of Paris, Paris, France (Moszkowicz et al., 2020) Videoconferencing Teachers teach topics in anatomy to surgical students through live streamed lectures Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran (Aghakhani & Shalbafan, 2020) University website Disseminating study material, including multimedia resources, through univer- sity website University of Manitoba in Winnipeg, MB, Canada (Boodman et al., 2020) Weekly newsletter Medical students are bringing out a newsletter that answers queries of doctors regarding COVID-19. Students take help of senior doctors and librarians, and use a wide range of ICT tools. (continued) 313 Table 1. Continued. Medical school(s) ICT tools used Pedagogical approach Seven medical schools in Poland (Czepczynski & Kunikowska, 2020) Online collaboration platform, videoconferencing Courses on nuclear medicine are being taught online. Study materials are dis- tributed through university websites and online collaborations platforms. Students study the materials and discuss the same with teachers during online meetings Ten medical schools in Australia and New Zealand (Pather et al., 2020) Prerecorded lectures, videoconferencing Topics in anatomy are being taught using prerecorded and live-streamed lec- tures and multimedia study materials McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada (Abi-Rafeh et al., 2019) Online, educational platforms, Instagram live stream Usage of social media, such as Instagram live streaming, and other online edu- cational to provide front-row access and collaborative discussions with mentors and peers Leeds Teaching Hospitals, UK (Hughes et al., 2020) Whatsapp Facilitating case-based discussion and question and answer sessions via Whatsapp groups to encourage informal, albeit professional, discussions among plastic surgery trainees National University of Singapore, Singapore (Ashokka et al., 2020) Web-based learning, prerecorded lectures Consolidated response of using web-based learning and prerecorded lectures for various components based on the severity of the outbreak University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada (Hintz et al., 2020) Online collaboration tools Morning handover and teaching rounds for surgical residents are being per- formed virtually Note. ICT information communication technology. 314 or through the video conferencing setup and the sessions may be recorded. It requires substantial time and effort to develop multimedia resources and simu- lation tools appropriate for teaching a course (Jain et al., 2018), and not many such tools are in use currently. Garcia et al. (2020) recommend that medical students be encouraged to attend online conferences both within and outside their university and provided with online mentorship on a one-on-one or small group basis. Porpiglia et al. (2020) suggested that online symposiums can be conducted to foster medical education and research. Such symposiums may include talks, posters, discus- sions, and even industry interactions. Clinical skill lessons are also being delivered online in some cases, although it has been observed that clinical courses typically require more time to be moved to an online platform (Aghakhani & Shalbafan, 2020). Some online resources are available for teaching surgery as well (Abi-Rafeh & Azzi, 2020). Viewing high- quality surgical videos and self and peer review of videos is being encouraged to compensate for the lack of time in the operating room (Chick et al., 2020). Examinations are also transitioning into a virtual format. Preparations for the future academic sessions, including the selection of potential candidates, are also being made safely and virtually via video conferencing solutions (Cleland, Chu et al., 2020; Cleland, McKimm, et al., 2020). Teachers are typically trying to keep their pedagogical approach simple, while also innovating and transitioning their teaching techniques from those suited for face-to-face instruction to those in virtual formats (Seymour-Walsh et al., 2020). The focus of medical educators remains on innovating in a new environment with novel technologies and adapting to exible learning plans and outcomes (Hall et al., 2020). There is considerable emphasis on cultivating resilience in the learning environment (Wald, 2020). Most teachers and students are nding online education acceptable under the current circumstances (Chick et al., 2020; Czepczynski & Kunikowska, 2020). An Analysis of ICT Tools A wide variety of ICT tools are available currently, many of which are playing a pivotal role in ensuring the educational continuity for medical students during the COVID-19 pandemic. The major categories of tools include videoconferenc- ing (Hintz et al., 2020) and teleconferencing solutions (Alvin et al., 2020), pre- recorded videos (Chick et al., 2020), social media (Chick et al., 2020; Hughes et al., 2020; Ricciardi et al., 2020), live streaming applications (Abi-Rafeh et al., 2019), and web-based learning tools (Table 2). Videoconferencing tools allow for a high degree of real-time collaboration between the educators, students, and peers. These tools have assumed immense popularity in the light of the pandemic, given their ability to replicate in-person interaction in close proximity. A variety of internet-based videoconferencing 315 Chatterjee and Chakraborty Table 2. A Comparison of ICT Tools Used for Medical Education. ICT tools used Advantages Disadvantages Videoconferencing Allows close replication of personal interaction and can be done on individual as well as large group basis. This ICT tool is based on internet connectivity and may not be suitable for areas with limited connectivity. In addi- tion, hardware such as a camera and microphone are also required. Teleconferencing Suitable for large group webinars and conferences, conducted via the telecom network. Do not support video-based interaction. Prerecorded videos Allows lectures to be shared beforehand and viewed at the student s leisure and revisited, if required. Do not support live video interaction. However, interaction methods may be supplemented by means of other channels such as email, text messages, and so on Facebook group Easy access and popular method for collaboration. Allows for close group discussion and collaboration using text and multimedia. Requires internet connectivity and a Facebook account. Discussions may assume an informal nature and may need to be moderated. Whatsapp Free of cost, easy to access, and a highly popular instant mes- saging application. Allows for simple and quick collaboration on individual and group levels, both via text and multimedia. Also provides audio and video conferencing capabilities. Requires internet connectivity and a mobile device. Discussions may assume an informal nature and may need to be moderated. Twitter Public platform to interact with a large audience in a succinct format, via text and multimedia. Requires internet connectivity and has a limited number of characters supported. Not suitable for long form interactions. LinkedIn Public platform for professional networking, suitable to keep updated with industrial trends. Requires internet connectivity and may cater to a limited audience of professionals. Instagram live stream Easy, free of cost access to video live streaming on a medium highly popular with young students. Audience interaction can also be facilitated by means of text and video responses. Requires internet connectivity, a mobile device and an Instagram account. Web-based learning applications Cater to the holistic learning experience including uploading and sharing learning materials, interactions and discussions with instructors and peers, submission and evaluation of assignments. Requires internet connectivity Note. ICT information communication technology. 316 tools are available currently, supporting handheld devices such as mobile phones, tablets, and also laptops and desktops. These solutions are also rapidly scaling up to support the needs of large groups in video calls as well as to facilitate virtual classroom lectures, conferences, and so on. Teleconferencing tools also provide similar solutions via the telecom network and are useful in regions where internet connectivity may be erratic or scarce. Prerecorded videos and video sharing platforms are also proving to be useful for sharing and disseminating lectures. This format requires multimedia tools to record and edit video content and most commonly, a web-based sharing plat- form, where the videos can be uploaded, shared, and accessed at the students convenience. Prerecorded videos have their appeal in allowing the educational materials to be accessed at leisure and even repeatedly, if required. Such videos also form the basis of publicly accessible lectures to promote equitable access to high-quality learning materials. Social media is a ubiquitous and popular choice of ICT tool for collaboration and learning, especially due to its appeal with the students, ease of access, and wide utilities. Facebook groups allow easy, closed group collaboration on lec- ture materials. Such groups provide an effective medium of conducting case- based discussions for a limited group of individuals who can participate in the discussion via the web or mobile-based platforms. Whatsapp, the popular instant messaging application, is facilitating sharing of instant messages and multimedia to individual users and large groups, free of charge via the internet. Such messaging applications tap into the convenience, ease of use for the stu- dents and educators, and allow for both formal and informal discussions. Twitter is a public platform which is being used to connect with a larger audience of medical industry leaders, peers, patients, and educating the commu- nity at large. The microblogging nature of the platform allows medical profes- sionals to use the short text and multimedia aid format to communicate succinctly and reach a wide audience. LinkedIn, a similar public platform, provides the tools for professional networking and continuing professional advancement through the web and mobile-based platforms. Instagram, another popular mobile-based social media application which relies greatly on sharing photographs and videos, is also a popular choice among students and lecturers. Social media applications such as Instagram and Facebook also have video live streaming capabilities allowing ready and safe access to live demonstrations in the clinical environment. Such live stream sessions also allow for real-time interaction with the students, by means of text-based or verbal responses. These can be easily accessed via mobile and web-based platforms. Web-based learning applications have been in use for the past several years and have contributed immensely in providing equitable and ready access to high-quality materials, earlier only available to a select group worldwide. Such platforms support a holistic learning experience, including uploading and interaction with text and multimedia content, interaction and discussion 317 Chatterjee and Chakraborty with instructors and peers, and submission and evaluation of assignments. All of these facilities are made available through websites, and in many cases, through mobile applications as well. Discussion Medical schools are trying to adapt to the pandemic (Cleland, Chu et al., 2020; Cleland, McKimm, et al., 2020) and using ICT for teaching, assessing, and managing students (Jervis & Brown, 2020; Watson et al., 2020). While preclin- ical courses may be taught through videoconferencing, clinical courses may bene t from simulation tools and problem-based learning tutorials (Sahi et al., 2020). Flipped classroom methods are a well-studied teaching pedagogy, providing learners with prerecorded didactic video lectures to be watched at the learner s leisure before an in-person conference. The purpose of the in-person congrega- tion shifts to application and case-based discussion on the basis of the lecture. These methods are found to be more effective than traditional teaching methods to improve student learning performance (Hew & Lo, 2018). Given the prior experimentation and experience of medical educators, ipped classroom meth- ods and technologies provided a rapid transition in the light of the prevailing restrictions due to COVID-19. Although some medical schools had been exper- imenting with ipped classrooms to provide individualized and blended learning models in recent years, face-to-face interaction for peer group discussions, lab- oratory and technology sessions, continues to play a crucial role in medical education (Michels et al., 2020). Medical educators agree that there can be no substitute for hands-on learning through dissections, equipment training, direct patient care, and operative experience (Chick et al., 2020; Evans et al., 2020). However, the introduction of ipped classrooms during the COVID-19 pandem- ic will provide the platform for incorporation of ipped classrooms and their numerous bene ts in the medical education system of the future. Video-based coaching for surgical education, in an era of competency-based surgical education, was already being evaluated for its ef cacy before the COVID-19 pandemic and has been observed to increase the technical perfor- mance of surgical residents (Augestad et al., 2020), including in suturing tasks (Alameddine et al., 2018). Residents have also favorably viewed video-based surgical instruction and preferred intraoperative recordings (McKinley et al., 2019). E-learning has also been found to be effective in teaching cases through virtual patients (Jayakumar et al., 2015). Furthermore, surgical simulations, preferably using virtual reality, can be used as viable educational tools (Kogan et al., 2020). Future studies must be undertaken in order to regularize the delivery of lessons through electronic mediums. Delivery of case discussions in an informal, albeit professional, manner through the free, encrypted cross platform application Whatsapp (Hughes 318 Journal of Educational Technology Systems 49(3 ) et al., 2020) and social media-based live streaming services such as Instagram live (Abi-Rafeh et al., 2019) encourage active involvement by students at all levels, while bridging the gap in clinical exposure due to the pandemic and providing opportunities for mentorship and collaboration. The ef cacy of Whatsapp as an educational tool has been evaluated (Coleman & O Connor, 2019) and if used appropriately with the purpose of disseminating medical edu- cation and discussion can serve as the basis of an instant messaging application- based learning model for medical education. Hughes et al. (2020) rightly add caveats to ensure privacy, despite Whatsapp s end-to-end encryption, and refrain from disclosing patient details and identi able data. Professional usage of closed social media groups for sur- gical practice and education calls for informed patient consent, the responsibility of which lies with the physician (Bittner et al., 2019). Online education is allowing medical students to attend lectures and access study materials from anywhere and at any time using a computer or a smart- phone (Chick et al., 2020). This is particularly helpful for international students many of whom have returned to their native countries at the outbreak of the pandemic (Sandhu & de Wolf, 2020). Similar to other educational domains, usage of ICT tools has also brought about a democratization of educational content, giving students access to high-quality didactic tutorials by the pioneers in their eld, regardless of geographical and monetary barriers (Abi-Rafeh & Azzi, 2020). Shaping the Educational Fabric of the Future The COVID-19 pandemic presents us with both the gaps in the current system and the opportunity to rethink educational paradigms, especially in the context of medical education and the incorporation of ICT tools in the longer run. ICT tools have acceptably provided continuity of education in the ongoing crisis and have even exhibited their bene ts in multiple spheres. Some online teaching learning processes introduced in medical education due to the COVID-19 pan- demic have been appreciated by teachers and students, and will perhaps contin- ue to be used in the future (Ahmed et al., 2020). Medical education systems have largely focused on content delivery over problem-solving and the call for reforms and the introduction of digital infra- structure has long been made, but the changes in the light of the pandemic can catalyze the long pending changes (Chen & Mullen, 2020). Online lecture videos have been identi ed to be an effective and preferred content delivery route in learning, leaving in person interactions for active learning, problem-solving, and providing feedback. The current assumption of the availability of a device with the learner exposes equity gaps (Fuller et al., 2020) which must be addressed in order to provide educational access to all. This paradigm shift in the delivery and assessment of 319 Chatterjee and Chakraborty medical education also calls for the exibility and innovation in the policy response for the present and the future (Fuller et al., 2020). The pedagogical approaches must acknowledge the capabilities and limitations of modern online educational systems and create systems which accommodate learners across socioeconomic backgrounds and geographies (Seymour-Walsh et al., 2020). It is also worth noting that transition from workplaces and medical schools to a home-based learning environment via ICT tools may result in isolation and dif - culties in establishing boundaries between home and work environments, affecting medical educators, students, and staff. In reimagining medical education for the future, arrangements must be made to take into account the mental well-being of health-care professionals who are exposed rst-hand to the current ongoing crisis. Conclusion The COVID-19 pandemic has undoubtedly impacted all aspects of education. However, in case of medical education, the impact is unique since medical educators play dual roles of health-care providers who are engaged in combat- ing the pandemic on the frontlines. Continuity of medical education has gained paramount importance in the light of the global emergency and has been affect- ed by the social distancing norms in place. ICT tools are proving to be acceptable and even indispensable in lling the gaps in medical education currently. A wide variety of ICT tools such as uni- versity websites, online collaboration and video conferencing tools, prerecorded and live-streamed video lectures, social media platforms are proving to be effec- tive means to ensure educational effectiveness and continuity for the training of the future generation of medical students. The COVID-19 pandemic also presents the opportunity to rethink education- al paradigms (Wotto, 2020), especially in the context of medical education and the incorporation of ICT tools in the longer run. While the usage of ICT tools was being experimentally being evaluated by medical schools before the pan- demic and was found to be promising, the current circumstances have acceler- ated their adoption and have provided real-time value and adoption. Medical educators and professionals are reevaluating the usage of technological tools to provide effective and safe ways to deliver instruction during the foreseeable future during the pandemic and beyond. The digital infrastructure put in place for teaching during this time and the learning from this transition can provide the much-needed foundation and impetus of creating a medical educa- tion system of the future, powered by ICT tools. Declaration of Conflicting Interests The author(s) declared no potential con icts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. 320 Journal of Educational Technology Systems 49(3 ) Funding The author(s) received no nancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publi- cation of this article. ORCID iDs Ipshita Chatterjee https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2156-1942 Pinaki Chakraborty https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2010-8022 References Abi-Rafeh, J., & Azzi, A. J. (2020). Emerging role of online virtual teaching resources for medical student education in plastic surgery: COVID-19 pandemic and beyond. Journal of Plastic, Reconstructive & Aesthetic Surgery, 73(8), 1575 1592. Abi-Rafeh, J., El-Hawary, H., & Azzi, A. J. (2019). The value of collaboration and mentorship in plastic surgery. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery-Global Open, 7(7), e2319. Aghakhani, K., & Shalbafan, M. (2020). What COVID-19 outbreak in Iran teaches us about virtual medical education. Medical Education Online, 25(1), 1770567. Ahmed, H., Allaf, M., & Elghazaly, H. (2020). COVID-19 and medical education. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20(7), 777 778. Alameddine, M. B., Englesbe, M. J., & Waits, S. A. (2018). A video-based coaching intervention to improve surgical skill in fourth-year medical students. Journal of Surgical Education, 75(6), 1475 1479. Almarzooq, Z., Lopes, M., & Kochar, A. (2020). Virtual learning during the COVID-19 pandemic: A disruptive technology in graduate medical education. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 75(20), 2635 2638. Alvin, M. D., George, E., Deng, F., Warhadpande, S., & Lee, S. I. (2020). The impact of COVID-19 on radiology trainees. Radiology, 296(2), 246 248. Ashokka, B., Ong, S. Y., Tay, K. H., Loh, N., Gee, C. F., & Samarasekera, D. D. (2020). Coordinated responses of academic medical centres to pandemics: Sustaining medical education during COVID-19. Medical Teacher, 42(7), 762 771. Augestad, K. M., Butt, K., Ignjatovic, D., Keller, D. S., & Kiran, R. (2020). Video-based coaching in surgical education: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Surgical Endoscopy, 34(2), 521 535. Bittner, J. G., I. V., Logghe, H. J., Kane, E. D., Goldberg, R. F., Alseidi, A., Aggarwal, R., & Jacob, B. P. (2019). A Society of Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) statement on closed social media (FacebookV R ) groups for clinical education and consultation: Issues of informed consent, patient privacy, and surgeon protection. Surgical Endoscopy, 33(1), 1 7. Boodman, C., Lee, S., & Bullard, J. (2020). Idle medical students review emerging COVID-19 research. Medical Education Online, 25(1), 1770562. Chen, C. H., & Mullen, A. J. (2020). COVID-19 can catalyze the modernization of medical education. JMIR Medical Education, 6(1), e19725. Chick, R. C., Clifton, G. T., Peace, K. M., Propper, B. W., Hale, D. F., Alseidi, A. A., & Vreeland, T. J. (2020). Using technology to maintain the education of residents during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Surgical Education, 77(4), 729 732. 321 Chatterjee and Chakraborty Cleland, J., Chu, J., Lim, S., Low, J., Low-Beer, N., & Kwek, T. K. (2020). COVID 19: Designing and conducting an online mini-multiple interview (MMI) in a dynamic landscape. Medical Teacher, 42(7), 776 780. Cleland, J., McKimm, J., Fuller, R., Taylor, D., Janczukowicz, J., & Gibbs, T. (2020). Adapting to the impact of COVID-19: Sharing stories, sharing practice. Medical Teacher, 42(7), 772 775. Coleman, E., & O Connor, E. (2019). The role of WhatsAppV R in medical education; a scoping review and instructional design model. BMC Medical Education, 19(1), 279. Czepczynski, R., & Kunikowska, J. (2020). Teaching nuclear medicine in the pandemic A new challenge for the faculty. European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, 47(9), 2075 2077. Dhawan, S. (2020). Online learning: A panacea in the time of COVID-19 crisis. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 49(1), 5 22. Edigin, E., Eseaton, P. O., Shaka, H., Ojemolon, P. E., Asemota, I. R., & Akuna, E. (2020). Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on medical postgraduate training in the United States. Medical Education Online, 25(1), 1774318. Evans, D. J., Bay, B. H., Wilson, T. D., Smith, C. F., Lachman, N., & Pawlina, W. (2020). Going virtual to support anatomy education: A stopgap in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic. Anatomical Sciences Education, 13(3), 279 283. Ferrel, M. N., & Ryan, J. J. (2020). The impact of COVID-19 on medical education. Cureus, 12(3), e7492. Fuller, R., Joynes, V., Cooper, J., Boursicot, K., & Roberts, T. (2020). Could COVID-19 be our there is no alternative (TINA) opportunity to enhance assessment? Medical Teacher, 42(7), 781 786. Garcia, R. M., Reynolds, R. A., Weiss, H. K., Chambless, L. B., Lam, S., Dahdaleh, N. S., & Rosseau, G. (2020). Preliminary national survey results evaluating the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on medical students pursuing careers in neurosurgery. Neurosurgery, 87(2), E258 E259. Hall, A. K., Nousiainen, M. T., Campisi, P., Dagnone, J. D., Frank, J. R., Kroeker, K. I., Brzezina, S., Purdy, E., &Oswald, A. (2020). Training disrupted: Practical tips for supporting competency-based medical education during the COVID-19 pandemic. Medical Teacher, 42(7), 756 761. Hew, K. F., & Lo, C. K. (2018). Flipped classroom improves student learning in health professions education: A meta-analysis. BMC Medical Education, 18(1), 38. Hintz, G. C., Duncan, K. C., Mackay, E. M., Scott, T. M., & Karimuddin, A. A. (2020). Surgical training in the midst of a pandemic: A distributed general surgery residency program s response to COVID-19. Canadian Journal of Surgery, 63(4), E346 E348. Hughes, B. A., Stallard, J., & West, C. C. (2020). The use of WhatsappV R as a way to deliver plastic surgery teaching during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Plastic, Reconstructive & Aesthetic Surgery, 73(7), e1 e2. Jain, D., Chakraborty, P., & Chakraverty, S. (2018). Smartphone apps for teaching engineering courses: Experience and scope. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 47(1), 4 16. Jayakumar, N., Brunckhorst, O., Dasgupta, P., Khan, M. S., & Ahmed, K. (2015). E-learning in surgical education: A systematic review. Journal of Surgical Education, 72(6), 1145 1157. 322 Journal of Educational Technology Systems 49(3 ) Jervis, C. G., & Brown, L. R. (2020). The prospects of sitting end of year open book exams in the light of COVID-19: A medical student s perspective. Medical Teacher, 42(7), 830 831. Kachra, R., & Brown, A. (2020). The new normal: Medical education during and beyond the COVID-19 pandemic. Canadian Medical Education Journal. Advance online pub- lication. https://doi.org/10.36834/cmej.70317 Kogan, M., Klein, S. E., Hannon, C. P., & Nolte, M. T. (2020). Orthopaedic education during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 28(11), e456 e464. Marasco, G., Nardone, O. M., Maida, M., Boskoski, I., Pastorelli, L., & Scaldaferri, F. (2020). Impact of COVID-19 outbreak on clinical practice and training of young gastroenterologists: A European survey. Digestive and Liver Disease, 21(1). https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.dld.2020.05.023 McKinley, S. K., Hashimoto, D. A., Mansur, A., Cassidy, D., Petrusa, E., Mullen, J. T., Phitayakorn, R., & Gee, D. W. (2019). Feasibility and perceived usefulness of using head-mounted cameras for resident video portfolios. The Journal of Surgical Research, 239, 233 241. Mian, A., & Khan, S. (2020). Medical education during pandemics: A UK perspective. BMC Medicine, 18, 100. Michels, N. R., Scherpbier, N., Karppinen, H., Buchanan, J., & Windak, A. (2020). Do you know how COVID-19 is changing general practice/family medicine education? Education for Primary Care, 31(3), 196 197. Moszkowicz, D., Duboc, H., Dubertret, C., Roux, D., & Bretagnol, F. (2020). Daily medical education for con ned students during COVID-19 pandemic: A simple vid- eoconference solution. Clinical Anatomy, 33(6), 927 928. Pather, N., Blyth, P., Chapman, J. A., Dayal, M. R., Flack, N. A., Fogg, Q. A., Green, R. A., Hulme, A. K., Johnson, I. P., Meyer, A. J., Shortland, P. J., Strkalj, G., Strkalj, M.,Valter, K., Webb, A. L., Woodley, S. J., Lazarus, M. D., & Morley, J. W. (2020). Forced disruption of anatomy education in Australia and New Zealand: An acute response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Anatomical Sciences Education, 13(3), 284 300. Porpiglia, F., Amparore, D., Autorino, R., Checcucci, E., Cooperberg, M. R., Ficarra, V., & Novara, G. (2020). Traditional and virtual congress meetings during the COVID-19 pandemic and the post-COVID-19 era: Is it time to change the paradigm? European Urology, 78(3), 301 303. Rasmussen, S., Sperling, P., Poulsen, M. S., Emmersen, J., & Andersen, S. (2020). Medical students for health-care staff shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Lancet, 395(10234), e79 e80. Ricciardi, G., Biondi, R., & Tamagnini, G. (2020). Go back to the basics: Cardiac surgery residents at the time of COVID-19. Journal of Cardiac Surgery, 35(7), 1400 1402. Rose, S. (2020). Medical student education in the time of COVID-19. JAMA, 323(21), 2131 2132. Sahi, P. K., Mishra, D., & Singh, T. (2020). Medical education amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Indian Pediatrics, 57(7), 652 657. Sandhu, P., & de Wolf, M. (2020). The impact of COVID-19 on the undergraduate medical curriculum. Medical Education Online, 25(1), 1764740. 323 Chatterjee and Chakraborty Seymour-Walsh, A. E., Weber, A., & Bell, A. (2020). Pedagogical foundations to online lectures in health professions education. Rural and Remote Health, 20(2), 6038. Wald, H. S. (2020). Optimizing resilience and wellbeing for healthcare professions train- ees and healthcare professionals during public health crises Practical tips for an integrative resilience approach. Medical Teacher, 42(7), 744 755. Watson, A., McKinnon, T., Prior, S. D., Richards, L., & Green, C. A. (2020). COVID-19: Time for a bold new strategy for medical education. Medical Education Online, 25(1), 1764741. Wotto, M. (2020). The future high education distance learning in Canada, the United States, and France: Insights from before COVID-19 secondary data analysis. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 49(2), 262-281. Author Biographies Ipshita Chatterjee (BE Computer Engineering, NSIT, University of Delhi) is currently pursuing MSc Computer Science at Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford. Her areas of interests include arti cial intelli- gence and machine learning research for social good. Pinaki Chakraborty (BTech, Indraprastha University; and MTech and PhD, Jawaharlal Nehru University) is an assistant professor at Netaji Subhas University of Technology. His area of research includes systems software and educational software. 324 Journal of Educational Technology Systems 49(3 )