Short communication A brief survey of computerized expert systems for crop protection being used in India Pinaki Chakraborty a,*, Dilip Kumar Chakrabarti b a School of Computer and Systems Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 110067, India b Department of Horticulture, Narendra Dev University of Agriculture and Technology, Kumarganj, Faizabad, Uttar Pradesh 224229, India Received 14 August 2007; received in revised form 22 November 2007; accepted 22 November 2007 Abstract In the recent years, a plethora of computerized expert systems has been developed for various sectors of agriculture in India. The availability of low-cost computers, agricultural knowledge and information technology professionals are the principal reasons for the development of so many agricultural expert systems. Among all agricultural expert systems, the expert systems for crop protection need special mention. These expert systems are meant to be used by farmers and other persons without much experience of using computers. Hence, special care must be taken while developing them. The current paper develops a taxonomy for the expert systems for crop pro- tection and brie y discusses four such expert systems for crop protection being used in India.  2007 National Natural Science Foundation of China and Chinese Academy of Sciences. Published by Elsevier Limited and Science in China Press. All rights reserved. Keywords: Computerized expert system; Agriculture; Agricultural expert system; Crop protection 1. Introduction Approximately two-thirds of all Indians depend on agri- culture for their livelihood either directly or indirectly. The area cultivated is considerably more than the half of the total area of the country. In the more fertile areas, like the northern plains and the deltas on the eastern coast, the proportion of cultivated area to the total area generally exceeds 90%. Since the late 1960s, agricultural technology in India is undergoing rapid changes. Extension of irriga- tion projects, increased use of chemical fertilizers and pes- ticides, and introduction of high-yielding variety seeds are a few changes to name. However, pests and diseases still continue to be a major threat to the agricultural productivity in India. Every year the Indian farmers incur heavy losses due to these pests and diseases. As a result, the protection of crops from various pests and diseases has emerged as the greatest challenge for the agricultural science and technology community in India. A large volume of data and information has been generated by the agricultural research community over the years, but the eld implementations of the results of these researches are not as successful as they should have been. Although scores of material are available as scienti c publications, popular articles and extension bulletins, the farmer community does not have a proper access to them. Consequently, the farmers in India continue to su er. The beginning of the widespread use of computers and information technology in India in the 1990s proved to be bene cial to the Indian agriculture. Apart from other utilities, the help also came as agricultural expert systems. An expert system can be de ned as a piece of computer software that uses encoded knowledge to solve problems in a speci c domain that normally requires human exper- tise [1]. Soon after that, there was an explosion in the num- ber of agricultural expert systems for a vast domain of activities in agriculture including crop protection, irriga- tion, soil management and nutrient management. The cur- rent paper aims to provide a brief timely survey of the 1002-0071/$ - see front matter  2007 National Natural Science Foundation of China and Chinese Academy of Sciences. Published by Elsevier Limited and Science in China Press. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.pnsc.2008.01.001 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +91 9911128163. E-mail address: pinaki_chakraborty_163@yahoo.com (P. Chakraborty). www.elsevier.com/locate/pnsc Available online at www.sciencedirect.com Progress in Natural Science 18 (2008) 469 473 present trend rather than performing in-depth review and analysis of the technology. It discusses the design and implementation issues of agricultural expert systems in gen- eral and expert systems for crop protection in particular. The paper also provides concise overviews of four expert systems for crop protection that are being successfully used in India. 2. The agricultural expert system explosion in India In the last decade, expert systems have been developed for almost all sectors of agriculture in India. They include expert systems for pest management, crop selection, soil preparation, animal husbandry, sheries and food process- ing. Though the current paper focuses on expert systems for crop protection, there are four common reasons for the explosion in the number of agricultural expert systems in India. The rst important reason for the sudden increase in the number of agricultural expert systems in India is the avail- ability of low-cost computers. The advent of economic computer systems that are a ordable to big and even med- ium-sized farm owners has been a driving factor for the development of a large number of agricultural expert sys- tems. The second important reason is the availability of information and knowledge from long-term research in agriculture. Most of this information has been generated from systematic research in both laboratory and eld con- ditions sponsored by various government and non-govern- ment agencies. Thirdly, a respectable number of information technology professionals are now available to design and implement the agricultural expert systems. Last but in no way the least, is the boost in computer liter- acy and interest among the rural and agrarian societies that has signi cantly helped in the proliferation of the agricul- tural expert systems. 3. Design and implementation issues of expert systems for crop protection Developing an expert system for crop protection is not a trivial task. Several issues are required to be considered during the design and implementation stages. Some of these issues are quite di erent from the issues in developing expert systems in other domains [1]. The expert systems for crop protection are meant to be used directly by the farmers and the extension workers. Although a formidable part of this clientele group may be computer literate, none of them are pro cient computer users. The expert systems for crop protection should be such that this class of users nds them easy to use. Another sensitive issue is the use of the local languages that will help the expert systems for crop protection to spread to farmers who are not very uent in English. The key issues for suc- cess of expert systems for crop protection have been iden- ti ed and listed next. (1) User friendliness. The expert systems should be easy to use. They should not ask too many questions as that may overwhelm most users. The questions should be straight forward and their answers must be well de ned. (2) Use of local languages. Since all farmers are not well versed in English, the expert systems should support local languages to reach a larger audience. (3) Simple user interfaces. The user interfaces of the expert systems must be kept as simple as possible. The questions should be asked one by one and the expert systems should not display too much informa- tion at a time. (4) Use of photographs. The expert systems should use photographs of pests and diseased plants to help the users to correctly identify the symptoms. (5) Use of interactive controls to avoid typing. Since most users are not habituated to use computers, the expert systems must use interactive controls like radio but- ton, check box, dropdown list and list box to mini- mize the need of typing. (6) Option for printouts. Option to print a copy of the diagnosis and the proposed treatment must be available. (7) Standalone systems. Since the farmers seldom have any pro ciency in using computers, the expert sys- tems should be standalone systems and the users must not need to use any other software. (8) Setup program. The expert systems must come with simple setup programs so that the users can them- selves install the expert systems on their computers. The development of an expert system for crop protection is a dynamic process rather than a one-time activity. The occurrences of most crop diseases are greatly in uenced by the changes in the environmental and edaphic conditions of the region. The disease scenario is also a ected by the introduction of new crop varieties. Therefore, an expert sys- tem for crop protection should be updated regularly using the feedbacks obtained from the elds. To develop a reliable expert system for crop protection, the various factors that may in uence the occurrences of the diseases in the crops must be tracked continuously for at least 10 years. The working of most expert systems for crop protection can be broadly divided into two mutually exclusive and exhaustive phases. A typical rst phase deals with the diag- nosis of the pest or the disease from the available symptoms. Alternatively, a typical second phase deals with the prescrip- tion of proper preventive or curative measures. Most expert systems for crop protection use some form of backward chaining of logic to implement the rst phase and some form of forward chaining of logic to implement the second. 4. Examples of expert systems for crop protection At this point of the paper, a taxonomy of expert systems for crop protection should be formalized. Two parameters 470 P. Chakraborty, D.K. Chakrabarti / Progress in Natural Science 18 (2008) 469 473 that can be used for the classi cation of these expert sys- tems for crop protection are crop speci city and disease speci city. An expert system for crop protection can be developed either for a speci c crop or a number of crops. A crop speci c expert system for crop protection, in turn, may be developed either for a speci c disease or a number of diseases of the speci c crop. Accordingly, there are three types of expert systems for crop protection, viz., crop non- speci c, crop speci c and disease nonspeci c, and crop spe- ci c and disease speci c, as shown in Fig. 1. Four expert systems for crop protection that are being used successfully in India have been tabulated in Table 1. A brief account of each of them is given next. 4.1. Pesticide Advisor The Pesticide Advisor [2] is a suitable example of crop nonspeci c expert system for crop protection. The Pesti- cide Advisor has been developed to choose the most e ective and safest pesticides, and apply them correctly in the optimum doses. It is easy to use and interactive tool to suggest preventive and curative pesticides to man- age the most menacing pests for almost all important crops grown in India. It is meant to be used in the elds by the farmers as well as for research by scientists, researchers and students. The Pesticide Advisor plans its treatment policies using 198 pesticides for over 723 pests that a ect 94 crops. It has detailed information about the pesticides including their target pests, shelf lives, manufactures, chemical formulae and safety mea- sures. The expert system also proposes the use of the less hazardous biopesticides instead of the conventional chemical pesticides whenever possible. The Pesticide Advisor provides the information in a step by step man- ner and supports the generation of customized case reports. 4.2. Expert System for Pest and Disease on Di erent Field Crops in India The Expert System for Pest and Disease on Di erent Field Crops in India [3], abbreviated as ESPDDFCI, is another example of crop nonspeci c expert system for crop protection. It has been developed for identifying pests and diseases on the basis of various distinguishable symptoms. Widespread use of appropriate photographs has been made to help the users to correctly specify the symptoms. After the diagnosis, the ESPDDFCI proposes well practiced sci- enti c control measures for the diagnosed pest or disease. The expert system is meant for the use by farmers, exten- sion workers, scientists and agricultural researchers. The database used by the ESPDDFCI expert system can be updated from time to enhance the scope and the e ciency of the expert system. The provision for generating hard- copy reports is also available. Self-explanatory help and information features have been extensively used in the expert system. A simple setup program has been developed so that even the naive users can install the expert system on their own computers. The ESPDDFCI has the unique fea- ture of supporting several local Indian languages. 4.3. Indian Cotton Insect Pest Management The Indian Cotton Insect Pest Management [4], abbrevi- ated as ICOTIPM, is a crop speci c and disease nonspeci c expert system for crop protection. The expert system is meant to be primarily used by the cotton farmers. ICO- TIPM uses the domain knowledge of entomologists engaged in research on cotton insect pests in India for mak- ing appropriate pest management decisions. The user inter- face is purposefully kept simple. It deals with all possible scenarios and provides descriptive photographs keeping in mind that the users may not be familiar in using comput- ers. The expert system diagnoses the pests either by the description of the damages done to the plants or by the photographs of the insects. After the diagnosis, the expert system proposes a concrete pest management strategy spec- ifying the pesticides to be used, their dosage and their application techniques. The ICOTIPM expert system has been provided with help and print options for the conve- nience of the users. The ICOTIPM is a standalone program and does not require the support of any other software for its smooth operation. Fig. 1. Classi cation of expert systems for crop protection. Table 1 Examples of expert systems for crop protection Expert system Attributes Crop (if crop speci c) Disease (if disease speci c) Crop speci city Disease speci city Pesticide Advisor [2] Nonspeci c Nonspeci c NA NA ESPDDFCI [3] Nonspeci c Nonspeci c NA NA ICOTIPM [4] Speci c Nonspeci c Cotton NA ESMMDM [5,6] Speci c Speci c Mango Malformation P. Chakraborty, D.K. Chakrabarti / Progress in Natural Science 18 (2008) 469 473 471 4.4. Expert System for Management of Malformation Disease of Mango The Expert System for Management of Malformation Disease of Mango [5,6], abbreviated as ESMMDM, is a crop and disease speci c expert system for crop protec- tion. It has been developed for the use of farmers and agriculture extension workers. ESMMDM predicts the incidence of the malformation disease in the mango crop and suggests an appropriate integrated management scheme for its cure. Etiological and epidemiological knowledge accumulated from long-term research under both laboratory and eld conditions has been used in this expert system. The expert system is designed to operate for a large span of geographical and climatic conditions. It uses a fuzzy logic-based reasoning process to overcome the incompleteness and impreciseness in the inputs pro- vided by the users. The ESMMDM is a window based, user friendly and interactive software. A series of ques- tions is asked to the user to reach the correct inference about a particular case. The questionnaire is in the form of multiple choice questions. The users are required to select one of the options from an interactive control like a radio button or a dropdown list box. The questions have been designed in a simple language and appropriate photographs have been used to help the users to accu- rately specify the symptoms. The expert system can be used by any person with or without any skill in using computers. It can be used to generate a comprehensive report of the current case. The report includes the details of the symptoms and the treatment package prescribed. The report can be saved on the computer or printed for future references. The ESMMDM is a self su cient tool and does not depend on any other software in any form. A simple setup program for the ESMMDM expert system is also available. 4.5. Alien expert systems for crop protection Besides the native expert systems for crop protection, modi ed versions of several exotic expert systems for crop protection are being used in India. Quite a few successful expert systems for crop protection developed in other countries have been customized according to the Indian conditions and have been introduced in India. Jones et al. [7] have earlier developed a microcomputer-based sys- tem to predict primary apple scab infection periods. This system has been now modi ed as per the Indian climatic conditions and adopted successfully for forecasting pri- mary scab infections in apple orchards in India [8]. Due to the economic importance of the apple crop and the noto- riety of the apple scab disease, the Reuter Stokes apple scab predictor is also in use in India [9]. Krause et al. [10] have formerly developed a computerized system, called Blite- cast, for forecasting the occurrences of the late blight dis- ease of potato and for scheduling timely application of appropriate fungicides. Using the underlying principles of Blitecast, a decision support system has been developed in India for forecasting the outbreaks of the late blight dis- ease in potato and prescribing suitable fungicides [11]. 5. Discussion Agriculture is still a sector where the level of tacit knowledge remains high [12]. The agricultural expert sys- tems combine the experimental and experiential knowledge with the intuitive reasoning skills of a multitude of special- ists to aid farmers and extension workers in making the best decisions for their crops [13]. The agricultural expert systems help in getting instant solution to the problems faced by the farmers. They help the farmers where services of the agricultural experts are not always available and thus solve the problems faced by farmers at remote places. Consequently, the agricultural expert systems reduce the load from the experts. The agricultural expert systems encourage dissemination of research ndings and facilitate qualitative research on crop protection. Hence, expert sys- tems can be used as an e ective tool for agricultural research and planning. It has been observed that a computerized expert sys- tem is by and far the most e cient extension tool to take the technology from laboratories to farms directly with- out any dilution of content which normally creeps in because of the number of agencies involved in conven- tional technology transfer methodologies [3]. This is a salient feature of almost all expert systems and it largely attributes to the popularity of expert systems in numer- ous domains. Another key advantage of crop protection using computerized expert systems over conventional crop protection techniques is the judicious use of less hazardous chemical pesticides which can help in reducing their ill e ects to a large extent [2]. This phenomenon becomes more prominent if a proper coverage analysis of the available pesticides is performed before designing the expert systems. Moreover, sophisticated expert systems can also esti- mate potential yield reductions due to the disease occur- rences [14]. Thus, the expert systems for crop protection can help the farmers to plan their future moves. Due to all these reasons, the expert systems for crop protection are becoming well accepted in India. As a result, methodi- cal research on the expert systems for crop protection has been started in several universities and research institutes in India. In the near future, these expert systems for crop protection are expected to emerge as an indispensable com- ponent of the Indian agriculture. An interesting fact that can be noted is that most of the agricultural expert systems and more speci cally the expert systems for crop protection have been developed by scien- tists and researchers of reputed universities and institutes instead of any typical software farm. Hence, the quality of treatments prescribed by the expert systems in discussion can be trusted. Most of these expert systems are developed and distributed with purely noncommercial motives. 472 P. Chakraborty, D.K. Chakrabarti / Progress in Natural Science 18 (2008) 469 473 6. Conclusion It can be concluded that the advent of expert systems for crop protection has proved to be a boon for the Indian agriculture. If the current trend continues, more expert sys- tems will be available in the coming years and they will cover almost all aspects of Indian agriculture. References [1] Patterson DW. Introduction to arti cial intelligence and expert systems. New Delhi: Prentice-Hall; 2004. [2] Singh A, Sharma OP, Dhandapani A, et al. Pesticide Advisor: an expert system for judicious use of pesticides for management of pests. ICAR News 2006;12(4):17 9. [3] Sankar HR, Raju CA, Chandra J. Expert system on pests and diseases of major crops in Andhra Pradesh. ICAR News 2006;12(2):5. [4] Vennila S, Majumdar G, Ramasundaram P. ICOTIPM: a system for Indian cotton insect pest management. ICAR News 2004;10(1):2 3. [5] Chakrabarti DK, Chakraborty P. Expert system for management of malformation disease of mango. ICAR News 2006;12(1):18. [6] Chakrabarti DK, Chakraborty P. A disease speci c expert system for the Indian mango crop. J Agric Educ Extension 2007;13(1): 81 2. [7] Jones AL, Lillevik SL, Fisher PD, et al. A microcomputer based instrument to predict primary apple scab infection periods. Plant Dis 1980;64(1):69 72. [8] Sharma JN, Gupta VK. Studies on apple scab forecasting in Himachal Pradesh. Indian Phytopathol 1995;48(3):325 30. [9] Gupta VK. The concept of integrated disease management in apple. In: Proceedings of International Symposium for Sustainable Agri- culture, 2000, p. 679 84. [10] Krause RA, Massie LB, Hyre RA. Blitecast: a computerized forecast of potato blight. Plant Dis Rep 1975;63(1):21 5. [11] CPRI. Annual Report 2004 05. Simla: Central Potato Research Institute; 2006. [12] Laurent C, Cerf M, Labarthe P. Agricultural extension services and market regulation: learning from a comparison of six EU countries. J Agric Educ Extension 2006;12(1):5 16. [13] Prasad GNR, Babu AV. A study on various expert systems in agriculture. Comput Sci Telecommun 2006;5(4):81 6. [14] Castro-Tendero AJ, Garcia-Torres L. Semagi an expert system for weed control decision making in sun owers. Crop Prot 1995;14(7):543 8. P. Chakraborty, D.K. Chakrabarti / Progress in Natural Science 18 (2008) 469 473 473