2021 Copyright held by the author(s). Published by AIJR Publisher in the Proceedings of International Conference on Women Researchers in Electronics and Computing (WREC 2021) April 22 24, 2021. Organized by the Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar, Punjab, INDIA Proceedings DOI: 10.21467/proceedings.114; Series: AIJR Proceedings; ISSN: 2582-3922; ISBN: 978-81-947843-8-8 Real Time Smartphone Data for Prediction of Nomophobia Severity using Supervised Machine Learning Anshika Arora*, Pinaki Chakraborty, M.P.S. Bhatia Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Netaji Subhas University of Technology, Delhi, India *Corresponding author doi: https://doi.org/10.21467/proceedings.114.11 Abstract Excessive use of smartphones throughout the day having dependency on them for social interaction, entertainment and information retrieval may lead users to develop nomophobia. This makes them feel anxious during non-availability of smartphones. This study describes the usefulness of real time smartphone usage data for prediction of nomophobia severity using machine learning. Data is collected from 141 undergraduate students analyzing their perception about their smartphone using the Nomophobia Questionnaire (NMP-Q) and their real time smartphone usage patterns using a purpose- built android application. Supervised machine learning models including Random Forest, Decision Tree, Support Vector Machines, Na ve Bayes and K-Nearest Neighbor are trained using two features sets where the first feature set comprises only the NMP-Q features and the other comprises real time smartphone usage features along with the NMP-Q features. Performance of these models is evaluated using f-measure and area under ROC and It is observed that all the models perform better when provided with smartphone usage features along with the NMP-Q features. Na ve Bayes outperforms other models in prediction of nomophobia achieving a f-measure value of 0.891 and ROC area value of 0.933. Keywords: machine learning, nomophobia, smartphone addiction, real time data Introduction Smartphones usage has grown to an extent where the phones have become an integral part of everyone s lives. Today smartphones are used throughout the day for multiple purposes including communication, productivity, utilities, and even entertainment, social networking, and gaming. The easy availability of smartphones and the Internet and the flexible schedules of millennials is leading them to excessive and addictive smartphone usage behaviors. Smartphone addiction is a shifting technological addiction as the mobile phones have evolved to smartphones encompassing varied Internet features and applications [1]. Smartphone addiction refers to overuse of smartphones with corresponding functional impairments. Strong evidences of smartphone addiction on adverse effects on academic performance of university students has been studied [1]. Recent investigations have explored novel psychological disorder associated with smartphone addiction which is termed as nomophobia. Nomophobia is the abbreviation of No Mobile Phone Phobia which is defined as a disorder of millennials which includes nervousness, distress and/or anxiety caused by the non-availability of smartphone [2, 3, 4]. Nomophobia is an outcome of excessive use of smartphones leading to its dependency for social networking and information retrieval. It arises from fear of losing connection with people, losing internet connectivity and access to social networking, and losing access to online information [5] leading to nomophobic people being anxious in such situations. Such people tend to keep their phone switched on 24 hours a day and even take their phone to bed contributing to night time usage and causing sleep disorders. Nomophobia has been studied to impact psychological, social, academic, and professional lives of smartphone users [1, 6]. Recently many researchers have attempted to assess nomophobia and to study its various aspects and dimensions using different methods [2-5, 7-15]. Arora and Chakraborty [16] reviewed the existing studies on Arora et al., AIJR Proceedings, pp.78-83, 2021 Proceedings of International Conference on Women Researchers in Electronics and Computing (WREC 2021) 79 nomophobia to identify the techniques used to detect nomophobia. It was found in their review that the most of the studies used self-reporting-based techniques for diagnosis of nomophobia with Nomophobia Questionnaire (NMP-Q) devised by Yildirim and Correia [5] being the most commonly used instrument. NMP-Q is a 20-item questionnaire where NMP-Q score is calculated as a sum of all items which indicates the severity of nomophobia. However, it has been suggested by most of the experts in psychological research and diagnosis that self-report data should not be used alone as it tends to be biased results [17]. Experts believe that combining individuals behavior or psychological data with self-report data is best for research. Hence, we propose assessment of nomophobia severity utilizing real-time smartphone usage data in addition to self-report NMP-Q data using machine learning for reliable and accurate diagnosis. Five baseline classifiers are trained with and without real time smartphone features. The machine learning models implemented are Random Forest (RF), Decision Tree (DT), Support Vector Machines (SVM), Na ve Bayes (NB), and K- Nearest Neighbor (K-NN). The performance of these classifiers is evaluated using performance metrics such as f-measure and area under ROC value. This paper is organised as follows: Section II presents the work done by researchers in the domain of assessment of smartphone addiction and nomophobia using machine learning. Section III presents the proposed methodology of the study. Section IV presents the results of implemented machine learning models. Section V provides the conclusion of the study. Related Work Recent studies employ machine learning and intelligent data mining techniques for analysis of smartphone addiction. Shin et al. [18] use a range of mobile phone usage data and identify a number of features in order to develop a machine learning based model for prediction of smartphone addiction. The algorithms used by them include Na ve Bayes, Support Vector Machines and AdaBoost and their model achieved and accuracy of 89.6% for detection of smartphone addiction. Lawanont et al. [19] built a smartphone addiction recognition system based on smartphone usage data. Based on this data, they implement a classification model utilizing Na ve Bayes, Decision Tree, K-Nearest Neighbor, and Support Vector Machines for recognition of likelihood of having smartphone addiction. In a recent study, Ellis et al. [20] utilize k-means clustering algorithm to cluster the users with similar smartphone usage behavior using the data retrieved from Apple s Screen Time application which automatically logs a series of behavioral metrics related to screen time over a period of seven days. In another more recent study, Elhai et al. [21] utilize supervised machine learning algorithms for detection of smartphone addiction severity among Chinese undergraduate students. They also correlated Fear of Missing Out (FOMO), depression and anxiety symptoms with smartphone addiction severity using the data from responses to smartphone addiction scale, Depression Anxiety Stress Scale-21, FOMO Scale, and Ruminative Responses Scale and concluded that FOMO had the largest relative contribution in modelling smartphone addiction severity. Kim et al. [22] propose a model based on Deep Belief Networks, K-Nearest Neighbor, and Support Vector Machines for prediction of smartphone addiction levels in individuals. The use of intelligent data analysis approaches for assessment of nomophobia has not been explored by many researchers. Nusawat and Kwangsawad [23] utilize Decision Tree and Na ve Bayes to identify the risk level of nomophobia from smartphone usage behavior of participants acquired through a questionnaire. Smartphone usage pattern data has been utilized for assessment of smartphone addiction using machine learning by a number of studies. However, no study has been reported utilizing smartphone usage data for assessment of nomophobia. This study aims to assess nomophobia severity among students utilizing supervised machine learning techniques using real time smartphone usage data along with the NMP-Q features. Series: AIJR Proceedings ISSN: 2582-3922 Real Time Smartphone Data for Prediction of Nomophobia Severity using Supervised Machine Learning 80 Proceedings DOI: 10.21467/proceedings.114 ISBN: 978-81-947843-8-8 Methodology This study assesses nomophobia severity among adolescents using the NMP-Q and smartphone usage data. Fig. 1 describes the framework of the proposed work. The NMP-Q and the smartphone usage data of 141 undergraduate students has been collected and machine learning algorithms are implemented to detect the nomophobia level of these students. Machine learning techniques are trained with two datasets where one dataset comprises only the features obtained from the NMP-Q and the other dataset comprises smartphone extracted features with the NMP-Q features. Comparison of the performance of algorithms with these two datasets is done. Following subsections describe the materials and methods used in this work. Fig. 1. Model Framework Nomophobia Questionnaire (NMP-Q) The nomophobia questionnaire (NMP-Q) [5] is used in this study in order to collect data from students on their dependence on smartphones. NMP-Q contains 20 questions each of which has to be answered on a 7-point Likert scale. The sum of answers is a measure of nomophobic behavior where a score less than or equal to 20 denotes absence of nomophobia. A score above 20 but less than 60 corresponds to mild nomophobia. A score above 60 and less than 100 corresponds to moderate nomophobia while a score above 100 is an indication of severe nomophobia. Smartphone Application (Activity Tracker) An android smartphone application named as Activity-Tracker is developed to automatically collect usage data from the smartphones of users. The application extracts how much the phone has been used in total, how much it has been used in night time (11 PM to 7 AM) and how many times it has been unlocked in the last 7 days. The application saves the extracted data in an online database from where it is accessed. Arora et al., AIJR Proceedings, pp.78-83, 2021 Proceedings of International Conference on Women Researchers in Electronics and Computing (WREC 2021) 81 Machine Learning Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence which provides computers the capability to automatically learn and improve through experience without human intervention or assistance via observations of data patterns and make decisions in the future. Data is labelled with four classes corresponding to four levels of nomophobia severity based on the NMP-Q value. Five supervised machine learning algorithms are implemented. The machine learning algorithms are Random Forest [24], Decision Tree [25], Support Vector Machines [26], Na ve Bayes [27], and K-Nearest Neighbor [28]. Results Five supervised machine learning algorithms are implemented and performance of machine learning algorithms is evaluated using two performance measures i.e., f-measure and value of area under ROC. Performance is compared using the two feature sets (only NMP-Q features and NMP-Q + smartphone extracted features. Fig. 2 and fig. 3 show the f-measure and ROC area respectively of the machine learning models with the two feature sets. Fig. 2. F-measure Fig. 3. Area under ROC Series: AIJR Proceedings ISSN: 2582-3922 Real Time Smartphone Data for Prediction of Nomophobia Severity using Supervised Machine Learning 82 Proceedings DOI: 10.21467/proceedings.114 ISBN: 978-81-947843-8-8 It can be observed that all the machine learning models perform better when real time smartphone usage features are added to the NMP-Q features. Maximum comparative difference of performance can be seen by DT and K-NN with two feature sets. DT performs with f-measure value of 0.739 and 0.797 without and with real time smartphone usage features respectively. It gives area under ROC value of 0.729 and 0.755 without and with smartphone usage features respectively. K-NN gives f-measure value of 0.824 and 0.847 without and with smartphone usage features respectively. It gives area under ROC value of 0.765 and 0.812 without and with smartphone usage features respectively. Na ve Bayes performs best in terms of both f-measure (0.891) and area under ROC value (0.933) when trained with both NMP-Q and real time smartphone usage features. Conclusion and Future work This paper proposes assessment of nomophobia severity using machine learning with real time smartphone usage data along with the nomophobia questionnaire (NMP-Q). Five baseline classification models namely random forest, decision tree, support vector machines, na ve bayes, and k-nearest neighbor are trained using two datasets. One dataset comprises only the NMP-Q features while the other comprises real time smartphone usage features along with the NMP-Q features. It has been observed that all the models perform better when trained with the smartphone usage features with the NMP-Q features. Decision tree and K-nearest neighbor show major performance difference when compared between the two feature sets. Na ve Bayes gives the highest value of f-measure (0.891) and area under ROC (0.933) with the smartphone usage features along with the NMP-Q features. Hence, the study concludes that real time smartphone usage features extracted from the smartphones of students are effective for prediction of nomophobia among students using machine learning. In future, deep learning models can be implemented for prediction of nomophobia using real time smartphone usage features. Also, data from social media and wearables such as smartwatches can be integrated with the smartphone usage data to study emotions and behavioral health of users using machine learning and deep learning algorithms. References [1] N.S. Hawi, and M. Samaha, To excel or not to excel: Strong evidence on the adverse effect of smartphone addiction on academic performance Computers & Education, 2016, 98, pp.81-89. [2] C. Yildirim, and A.P. Correia, Understanding nomophobia: A modern age phobia among college students, In International Conference on Learning and Collaboration Technologies, August 2015, (pp. 724-735). Springer, Cham. [3] A.L.S. King, A.M. Valen a, A.C.O. Silva, T. Baczynski, M.R. Carvalho, and A.E. Nardi, Nomophobia: Dependency on virtual environments or social phobia?, Computers in Human Behavior, 2013, 29(1), pp.140-144. [4] A.L.S. King, A.M. Valen a, A.C. Silva, F. Sancassiani, S. Machado, and A.E. Nardi, Nomophobia : Impact of cell phone use interfering with symptoms and emotions of individuals with panic disorder compared with a control group, Clinical practice and epidemiology in mental health: CP & EMH, 2014, 10, p.28. [5] C. Yildirim, and A.P. Correia, Exploring the dimensions of nomophobia: Development and validation of a self-reported questionnaire, Computers in Human Behavior, 49, 2015, pp.130-137. [6] A. Arora, P. Chakraborty, and M. P. S. Bhatia, Problematic use of digital technologies and its impact on mental health during covid-19 pandemic: assessment using machine learning, In: Arpaci, I., Al-Emran, M., Al-Sharafi, M. A. and Marques, G. (Eds.) Emerging Technologies During the Era of COVID-19 Pandemic, 2020 (in press). [7] I.B. Gurbuz, and, G. Ozkan,, What is your level of nomophobia? An investigation of prevalence and level of nomophobia among young people in turkey, Community mental health journal, 56(5), 2020, pp.814-822. [8] D.M. Gezgin, O. Cakir, and S. Yildirim, The Relationship between Levels of Nomophobia Prevalence and Internet Addiction among High School Students: The Factors Influencing Nomophobia, International Journal of Research in Education and Science, 4(1), 2018 pp.215-225. [9] C.Yildirim, E. Sumuer, M. Adnan, and S. Yildirim, A growing fear: Prevalence of nomophobia among Turkish college students. Information Development, 2016, 32(5), pp.1322-1331. [10] L. Argumosa-Villar, J. Boada-Grau, and A. Vigil-Colet, Exploratory investigation of theoretical predictors of nomophobia using the Mobile Phone Involvement Questionnaire (MPIQ), Journal of adolescence, 2017, 56, pp.127-135. Arora et al., AIJR Proceedings, pp.78-83, 2021 Proceedings of International Conference on Women Researchers in Electronics and Computing (WREC 2021) 83 [11] D. Tran, Classifying nomophobia as smart-phone addiction disorder, UC Merced Undergraduate Research Journal, 2016, 9(1). [12] N. Sharma, P. Sharma, N. Sharma, and R.R. Wavare, Rising concern of nomophobia amongst Indian medical students, International Journal of Research in Medical Sciences, 3(3), 2015, pp.705-707. [13] S. Han, K.J. Kim, and J.H. Kim, Understanding nomophobia: Structural equation modeling and semantic network analysis of smartphone separation anxiety, Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 20(7), 2017, pp.419-427. [14] H.Y. Durak, Investigation of nomophobia and smartphone addiction predictors among adolescents in Turkey: Demographic variables and academic performance, The Social Science Journal, 56(4), 2019, pp.492-517. [15] M. Prasad, B. Patthi, A. Singla, R. Gupta, S. Saha, J.K. Kumar, R. Malhi, and V. Pandita, Nomophobia: A cross-sectional study to assess mobile phone usage among dental students, Journal of clinical and diagnostic research: JCDR, 11(2), 2017, p.ZC34. [16] A. Arora, and P. Chakraborty, Diagnosis, prevalence and effects of nomophobia-A review, Psychiatry research, 2020, 288, p.112975. [17] A. Althubaiti, Information bias in health research: definition, pitfalls, and adjustment methods, Journal of multidisciplinary healthcare, 9, 2016, p.211. [18] C. Shin, and A.K. Dey, Automatically detecting problematic use of smartphones, In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing , 2013, (pp. 335-344). [19] W. Lawanont, and M. Inoue, A development of classification model for smartphone addiction recognition system based on smartphone usage data, In International Conference on Intelligent Decision Technologies, 2017, (pp. 3-12). Springer, Cham. [20] D.A. Ellis, B.I. Davidson, H. Shaw, and K., Geyer, Do smartphone usage scales predict behavior?, International Journal of Human- Computer Studies, 130, 2019, pp.86-92. [21] J.D. Elhai, H. Yang, D. Rozgonjuk, and C. Montag, Using machine learning to model problematic smartphone use severity: The significant role of fear of missing out, Addictive behaviors, 103, 2020, p.106261. [22] S.K. Kim, and H.B. Kang, An analysis of smartphone overuse recognition in terms of emotions using brainwaves and deep learning, Neurocomputing, 275, 2018, pp.1393-1406. [23] P. Nusawat, and A. Kwangsawad, Modeling and analysis in the risk level of nomophobia from smartphone usage behavior using data mining techniques, International journal of applied, 2020, 13(1). [24] G. Biau, and E. Scornet, A random forest guided tour, Test, 25(2), 2016, pp.197-227. [25] J. Bogaert, R. Ceulemans, and D. Salvador-Van Eysenrode, Decision tree algorithm for detection of spatial processes in landscape transformation, Environmental management, 33(1), 2004, pp. 62-73. [26] M. A. Hearst, S. T. Dumais, E. Osuna, J. Platt, and B. Scholkopf, Support vector machines, IEEE Intelligent Systems and their applications, 13(4), 1998, pp. 18-28. [27] I. Rish, An empirical study of the naive Bayes classifier, In IJCAI 2001 workshop on empirical methods in artificial intelligence, Vol. 3, No. 22, 2001, pp. 41-46. [28] R. Kruse, C. Borgelt, F. Klawonn, C. Moewes, M. Steinbrecher, and P. Held, Multi-layer perceptrons, In Computational Intelligence, 2013, pp. 47-81. Springer, London.