See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260650448 A Comparative Study on Maximum Power Point Tracking Techniques for Photovoltaic Power Systems Article in IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy January 2013 DOI: 10.1109/TSTE.2012.2202294 CITATIONS 1,609 READS 1,356 2 authors: Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Tokamak Sensor Fault Detection View project Formation control of autonomous marine vehicles View project Bidyadhar Subudhi National Institute of Technology Rourkela 219 PUBLICATIONS 5,091 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Raseswari Pradhan Veer Surendra Sai University of Technology 39 PUBLICATIONS 2,056 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Raseswari Pradhan on 30 September 2021. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. Accelerating the world's research. A Comparative Study on Maximum Power Point Tracking Techniques for Photovoltaic Power Systems Sunny Mohanty Related papers A Survey of Maximum PPT techniques of PV Systems Wening Mitrorukmi M. A Review of Maximum Power Point Tracking Techniques for Photovoltaic System Innovative Research Publications Adaptive perturb and observe algorithm for photovoltaic maximum power point tracking Rupesh C Roy Download a PDF Pack of the best related papers IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 4, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 89 A Comparative Study on Maximum Power Point Tracking Techniques for Photovoltaic Power Systems Bidyadhar Subudhi, Senior Member, IEEE, and Raseswari Pradhan Abstract This paper provides a comprehensive review of the maximum power point tracking (MPPT) techniques applied to photovoltaic (PV) power system available until January, 2012. A good number of publications report on different MPPT techniques for a PV system together with implementation. But, confusion lies while selecting a MPPT as every technique has its own merits and demerits. Hence, a proper review of these techniques is essential. Unfortunately, very few attempts have been made in this regard, excepting two latest reviews on MPPT [Salas et al., 2006], [Esram and Chapman, 2007]. Since, MPPT is an essential part of a PV system, extensive research has been revealed in recent years in this eld and many new techniques have been reported to the list since then. In this paper, a detailed description and then classi cation of the MPPT techniques have made based on features, such as number of control variables involved, types of control strategies employed, types of circuitry used suitably for PV system and practical/ commercial applications. This paper is intended to serve as a convenient reference for future MPPT users in PV systems. Index Terms Maximum power point tracking (MPPT) tech- niques, photovoltaic (PV) array. I. INTRODUCTION D UE TO THE growing demand on electricity, the limited stock and rising prices of conventional sources (such as coal and petroleum, etc.), photovoltaic (PV) energy becomes a promising alternative as it is omnipresent, freely available, environment friendly, and has less operational and maintenance costs [1]. Therefore, the demand of PV generation systems seems to be increased for both standalone and grid-connected modes of PV systems. Therefore, an ef cient maximum power point tracking (MPPT) technique is necessary that is expected to track the MPP at all environmental conditions and then force the PV system to operate at that MPP point. MPPT is an essential component of PV systems. Several MPPT techniques together with their implementation are reported in the literature [2] [62]. Users always feel confused while selecting an MPPT technique for a particular application. Unfortunately, only a few papers [2], [3] are available in this eld that includes discus- sions on MPPT techniques until 2007. But many new MPPT techniques such as distributed MPPT, the Gauss-Newton tech- nique, adaptive perturbation and observation, estimated perturb and perturb, adaptive fuzzy and particle swarm optimization (PSO)-based MPPT, etc., have been reported since then. Hence, it is necessary to prepare a review that includes all the ef cient Manuscript received November 03, 2011; revised March 07, 2012; accepted May 18, 2012. Date of publication July 26, 2012; date of current version De- cember 12, 2012. The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National In- stitute of Technology, Rourkela, 769008, India (e-mail: bidyadhar@nitrkl.ac.in; rase1512@gmail.com). Digital Object Identi er 10.1109/TSTE.2012.2202294 and effective MPPT techniques proposed before 2007 and after that until 2012. In this review, an attempt has also been made to compare the MPPT techniques on the basis of their advantages, disadvantages, control variables involved, types of circuitry, complexity of algorithm, complexity level on hardware imple- mentation, and types of scienti c and commercial application. This paper attempts to provide a comparative review on most of the reported MPPT techniques excluding any unintentionally omitted papers because of space limitations. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, MPPT techniques extracted from a vast literature survey on MPPT appeared until 2012 are discussed. These have been compared in Section III. MPPT ef ciency analysis has been made in Section IV with the concluding remarks are presented in Section V. II. REVIEW ON MPPT TECHNIQUES The following techniques are some of the widely used MPPT techniques applied on various PV applications such as space satellite, solar vehicles, and solar water pumping, etc. A. Curve-Fitting Technique MPP is the extreme value of the characteristic of a PV panel, hence at rst the characteristic of a PV panel is pre- dicted in this technique. To predict, this characteristic, PV panel can be modeled of ine based on mathematical equations or numerical approximations [4], [5]. To achieve an accurate curve tting, a third-order polynomial function as (1) where the coef cients , , , and are determined by sampling of PV voltage and power in intervals. Differentiation of (1) gives (2) (3) Thus, the voltage at MPP can be calculated as (4) In this technique, , , , and are repeatedly sampled in a span of few milliseconds using mathematical equations de ned in [5] and then is calculated. B. Fractional Short-Circuit Current (FSCI) Technique There exists a single operating point called MPP at which the power of the panel is maximum at a given environmental condition (Fig. 1). If by some means, any one of or are tracked then the corresponding 1949-3029/$31.00 2012 IEEE 90 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 4, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 Fig. 1. (a) and (b) characteristics of PV panel at different environ- mental conditions. can be tracked. In the FSCI technique, the nonlinear char- acteristics of PV system is modeled using mathematical equa- tions or numerical approximations taking account of a wide range of environmental conditions and degradation level of PV panel. Based on those characteristics, a mathematical re- lation between and is constructed as is linearly dependent on by an empirical relation shown as follows: (5) Equation (5) constructs the FSCI method. The value of gen- erally varies between 0.64 and 0.85 [6]. can be calculated by analyzing the PV system at wide range of solar radiations and temperatures. C. Fractional Open-Circuit Voltage (FOCV) Technique In this technique, can be calculated from the empirical relationship shown as follows: (6) It is found that the value of varies between 0.78 and 0.92 [6], [7]. can be calculated by analyzing the PV system at wide range of solar radiations and temperatures. In this method, the PV system is open-circuited at load end for a fraction of second and is measured, then is calculated using (6). Repeating this process is sampled repeatedly in every few seconds and value of is updated. D. Look-up Table Technique In this technique, MPP of a PV system is calculated before hand for each probable environmental condition and stored in the memory device of MPPT s control system. During the op- eration, the corresponding MPP for a particular condition is se- lected from that memory and implemented [8], [9]. E. One-Cycle Control (OCC) Technique OCC is a nonlinear MPPT control technique. It involves the use of a single-stage inverter where the output current of the inverter can be adjusted according to the voltage of the PV array so as to extract the maximum power from it [10] [12]. There is only one power conversion stage that realizes on both MPPT control and dc/ac inversion. The OCC system is shown in Fig. 2. The parameters involved in this system should Fig. 2. Block diagram of OCC technique. Fig. 3. Block diagram of voltage-feedback technique. be properly tuned as their values greatly affect the accuracy of OCC technique. F. Differentiation Technique This technique determines MPP of a PV system on solving the following: (7) But, this technique is very dif cult because at least eight mea- surements and calculations such as measurements of and , calculations of corresponding and for a time span of , calculation of , and then are required for this [13]. For faster MPP tracking operation, this technique needs a strong and expensive processor for solving the complex MPP equation. G. Feedback Voltage or Current Technique This technique is used in the system which has no battery. Without a battery, a simple controller is needed to x the bus voltage at a constant level [2]. Hence, a simple MPPT controller can be applied as shown in Fig. 3. In this method, the feedback of panel voltage (or current) is taken and compared with a pre- calculated reference voltage (or current); the duty ratio of dc/dc converter is continuously adjusted so that it operates close to that of MPP [14]. H. Feedback of Power Variation With Voltage Technique This technique [Fig. 4(a)] is similar to that of feedback voltage technique, but the only difference lies in the power variation with voltage . Maximum power control is achieved by forcing the derivative equal to zero under power feedback control. A general approach to power feedback control is to measure and maximize the power at the load terminals [15]. In this method, power to the load is maximized not the power from the solar array due to some unavoidable power-loss across SUBUDHI AND PRADHAN: COMPARATIVE STUDY ON MPPT TECHNIQUES FOR PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SYSTEMS 91 Fig. 4. (a) curve explaining feedback variation of power with voltage. (b) curve explaining feedback variation of power with current. the converter. Therefore, the design of a high performance con- verter is an issue of concern in this technique [16]. I. Feedback of Power Variation With Current Technique This technique [Fig. 4(b)] is similar to that of the technique, except the difference in the feedback of power vari- ation with current as its value is also zero at MPP. Hence, the duty cycle is adjusted till becomes zero at MPP [17]. J. Perturbation and Observation (P&O) And/Hill-Climbing Technique In this technique, rst the PV voltage and current are mea- sured and hence the corresponding power is calculated. Con- sidering a small perturbation of voltage or perturbation of duty cycle of the dc/dc converter in one direction corre- sponding power is calculated. is then compared with . If is more than , then the perturbation is in the correct di- rection; otherwise it should be reversed. In this way, the peak power point is recognized and hence the corresponding voltage can be calculated [18] [20]. The major draw- backs of P&O/hill-climbing are occasional deviation from the maximum operating point in case of rapidly changing atmo- spheric conditions, such as broken clouds. Also, correct pertur- bation size is important in providing good performance in both dynamic and steady-state response [21]. To solve this problem, a modi ed adaptive hill climbing technique (Fig. 5) with a vari- able perturbation step size can be used [22], where an automatic tuning controller varies the perturbation step size to a large value when the power changes in a large range primarily due to en- vironmental variation, to satisfy the fast response requirement during the transient stage. Further, the controller is formulated in such a manner that when the power change is less than or equal to the set lowest limit, the controller assumes that the system enters the steady- state and the value of perturbation becomes small. In similar Fig. 5. Block diagram of adaptive Hill-climbing technique. context, one Adaptive P&O technique [23] and another Predic- tive and Adaptive MPPT P&O technique [24] have been intro- duced. In the Adaptive P&O method, instead of , the main emphasis has been given on the voltage perturbation . In Predictive and Adaptive MPPT P&O method, a constant duty cycle perturbation that linearly reduces with increase of power drawn from PV panel has been taken. K. Incremental Conductance (Inc-Cond) Technique For a PV system, the derivative of panel output power with its voltage is expressed as (8) Referring to (3), the solution of (8) is zero at MPP, positive on the left of the MPP and negative on the right of the MPP. So, (8) can be rewritten as (9) Thus, MPP can be tracked by comparing the instantaneous conductance to the incremental conductance [25], [26]. It is the same ef cient as P&O, good yield under rapidly changing atmospheric conditions. Here, also the same perturbation size problem as the P&O exists and an attempt has been made to solve by taking variable step size [27]. But, it requires complex and costly control circuits. L. Forced Oscillation Technique This technique is based on injecting a small-signal sinusoidal perturbation into the switching frequency and comparing the ac component and the average value of the panel terminal voltage as shown in Fig. 6. Here, the switching frequency is varied and (input voltage) is sensed. Scaling down the value of and comparing with , the duty cycle of converter is set at MPP [28]. M. Ripple Correlation Control (RCC) Technique When a PV array is connected to a power converter, the switching action of the converter imposes voltage and current ripple on the PV array. That subjects ripple to the generated power of the PV system. In the RCC technique [29], this ripple is utilized by the PV system to perform MPPT. As the ripple is naturally available by using a switching converter, no arti cial perturbation is required. RCC correlates with either 92 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 4, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 Fig. 6. Block diagram of forced-oscillation technique. Fig. 7. PV array power versus average inductor current. or and hence using (10.1) and (10.2) the value of voltage and current of PV system are recognized whether more or less than that of MPP. The role of RCC is to force this ripple to zero and eventually drag the PV panel voltage and current to that of MPP (10.1) (10.2) RCC applies to any switching power converter topology. This adjustment of can be done by using a boost converter. Here, the inductor current is equal to the array current. At a given temperature and irradiance, is adjusted together with . When there is any change in environmental condition, MPP is also shifted. Then referring to Fig. 7, (10.1) (10.2) can be modi ed as follows: (11.1) (11.2) Adjusting the duty ratio , the value of can be adjusted. The value of can calculated using the following: (12) where is a constant. N. Current Sweep Technique The current sweep [30] technique uses a sweep waveform for the PV array current such that the characteristic of the PV array is obtained and updated at a constant time interval. The can then be computed from the characteristic curve at the same interval. The function chosen for the current sweep waveform is directly proportional to its derivative as (13) The solution of (13) is (14) Here, is taken as at MPP. Again at MPP (15) Using (13) in (15) (16) where can be calculated using (14), followed by using (16). Here, the reference point is frequently updated in a xed time interval and hence the technique yields accurate results if proportionality coef cients and are properly chosen. O. Estimated-Perturb-Perturb (EPP) Technique The EPP technique is an extended P&O method. This tech- nique has one estimate mode between two perturb modes. The perturb process conducts the search over the highly nonlinear PV characteristic and the estimate process compensates for the perturb process for irradiance-changing conditions. The tech- nique is complex but its tracking speed is faster and more accu- rate than that of P&O method [31]. P. Parasitic Capacitance Technique The parasitic capacitance technique [3], [32], [33] is similar to that of the Inc-Con technique, but the difference is in consid- eration of the effect of the PV cells parasitic junction capaci- tance , which is denoted by charge storage in the p-n junctions of the PV cells. This capacitance effect can be acknowledged by adding the current through the capacitance as in the PV panel model equation as follows: (17) Equation (17) can be rewritten as (18) where (19) Power output from the PV panel is represented by (20) The MPP is located at the point where . That means, (21) SUBUDHI AND PRADHAN: COMPARATIVE STUDY ON MPPT TECHNIQUES FOR PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SYSTEMS 93 Fig. 8. PV Array connected to boost circuit in RCC technique. Fig. 9. Experimental set-up for load current/voltage maximization technique of PV panel. where , and represent the instantaneous conductance, the incremental conductance, and the induced ripple from the parasitic capacitance, respectively. The rst and second derivatives of the array voltage are taken into account for the ac ripple components generated by the con- verter. The array conductance is the ratio of the instantaneous array current to the instantaneous array voltage and is calculated as follows [33]: (22) where is the average ripple power, is the magnitude of the voltage ripple. Values of and may be obtained from a circuit con guration (Fig. 8). The inputs to the circuit are the measured PV array current and voltage. The high-pass (HP) lters remove the dc compo- nent of . The two multipliers generate the ac signals of and , which are then ltered by the low-pass lters (LP), leaving behind the dc components of and . Q. Load Current/Load Voltage Maximization Technique If directly connected to the load, operation of the PV array at the MPP cannot be ensured even for constant loads. Thus oper- ation at the MPP cannot be achieved using a tunable matching network that interfaces the load to the PV array. The main com- ponents of the MPPT circuit are its power stage and the con- troller (Fig. 9). As the power stage is realized by means of a switched mode power converter, the control input is the duty cycle [34]. R. DC Link Capacitor Droop Control Technique DC-link capacitor droop control technique [2], [33] is de- signed to work with a PV system that is connected in parallel with an ac system line. The duty ratio ( ) of an ideal boost con- verter is represented as (23) where is the voltage across the PV array and is the voltage across the dc link. If is kept constant, the power coming out of the converter can be increased by increasing the current going in the inverter. While the current is increasing, the Fig. 10. Block diagram of dc-link capacitor droop technique. voltage can be kept constant as long as the power required by the inverter does not exceed the maximum power available from the PV array. If that is not the case, starts drooping. Right before the drooping point, the current control command of the inverter is at its maximum and the PV array operates at the MPP. The ac system line current is fed back to dc-link to pre- vent from drooping and is optimized to achieve MPPT as shown in Fig. 10. This technique is restricted to only to PV system that is connected in parallel with an ac system line. S. Linearization-Based MPPT Technique Both PV module and converter demonstrate nonlinear and time-variant characteristics, which make the MPPT design dif - cult. In this method, successive linearization simpli es the non- linear problem back to the linear case. The MPP of a PV module is estimated using a set of linear equations [36], exploiting the relation existing between the values of module voltage and cur- rent at the MPP locus. The analytical study of the PV panel model shows that this relationship between voltage and current tends to be linear for the higher irradiation conditions due to the effect of the PV panel series resistance. Based on that relation- ship of voltage and current, a linear approximation of the MPP locus is derived, whose parameters are simply related to those of the electrical parameters of a PV cell [35], [36]. T. Intelligence MPPT Techniques 1) Fuzzy Logic (FL)-Based MPPT Technique: Introduction of intelligent MPPTs in PV systems is very promising. They achieved very good performances, fast responses with no over- shoot, and less uctuations in the steady state for rapid temper- ature and irradiance variations. FL-based MPPT do not require the knowledge of the exact PV model [37], [38]. The FL-based MPPT in [37] has two inputs and one output. The two input vari- ables are error and change in error at the th sampled time are de ned as follows: (24) (25) where implies if the error of position of operating point of load at the th instant, while expresses the moving direction of this point. The fuzzy inference is carried out by using Mamdani s method and the defuzzi cation uses the centre of gravity to compute the output (duty ratio, ) of this fuzzy logic-based MPPT as shown in Fig. 11. 2) Arti cial Neural Network (ANN)-Based MPPT Technique: ANN control operates like a black box model, requiring no de- tail information about the PV system [39]. The link between the th and th nodes has weight as shown in Fig. 12. 94 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 4, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 Fig. 11. Block diagram of fuzzy logic MPPT technique. Fig. 12. ANN-based MPPT [40]. For MPPT, ANN input can be PV array parameters like PV voltages and currents, environmental data like irradiance and temperature, or any combination of these, whereas the output signal is the identi ed maximum power or the duty cycle signal used to drive the electronic converter to operate at the MPP. The NN input and output data are obtained from experimental measurement or model-based simulation results. After learning relation of with temperature and irradiance, ANN can track the MPP online [39] [41]. 3) Particle Swarm Optimization-Based MPPT (PSO-MPPT) Technique: Multiple maxima found in characteristics for partial shading conditions in multi-PV array structures. To handle this situation, an evolutionary computing approach called PSO has been employed for the multi-PV array structure in partial shading conditions because PSO works ef ciently in multivariable problem with multiple maxima [42] [44]. U. Sliding-Mode-Based MPPT Technique In Inc-Cond technique, ratio of array current and voltage term is compared with change in ratio of current and voltage term. Let be a constant term and de ned as . At MPP, . This concept is used in sliding mode-based MPPT technique [45]. The dc/dc converter is designed such that its switching control signal is generated as shown as (26) where implies the converter-switch is opened while it refers to closing of the switch when . In this way, the converter is forced to operate at MPP [45]. SMC-MPPT is compatible with a wide range of proces- sors such as DSP, microcontroller, FPGA, etc. Conventional SMC-MPPT has limitations like variable operating frequency and presence of nonzero steady state error. These problems are overcome to great extent by using discrete sliding mode con- troller [46] and PWM-based integral sliding mode controller [47]. Another problem in SMC-based MPPT is the measure- ment of and . Since is dependent on inductor current, estimation of needs a state observer [48]. V. Gauss-Newton Technique The Gauss-Newton technique is the fastest algorithm [49], which uses a root- nding algorithm. In its algorithm, rst and second derivatives of the change in power are used to estimate the direction and number of iterations of convergence while solving the following: (27) W. Steepest-Descent Technique In this technique [50], the nearest local MPP can be tracked by computing the following function: (28) where is the step-size corrector and is the deviation in power. Here, is calculated as follows: (29) (30) where is the local truncation error for the centered differentiation and is of second-order accuracy. The value decides how steep each step takes in the gradient direction. X. Analytic-Based MPPT Technique This technique is based on observations and experimental re- sults. From the experiments and observations, and are observed. Based on these observed values of and , a ball of small radius is selected for each panel such that MPP is in- side the ball. The analytic-based MPPT technique [51] is based on the mean value theorem, where, MPP is obtained from that ball by using mean value theorem. This technique is a simple heuristic strategy based on observations and experimental re- sults. Y. Hybrid MPPT (HMPPT) Techniques It is found that the P&O technique is the most extensively used in commercial MPPT systems because it is straight for- ward, accurate, and easy to implement. Its accuracy and tracking time depend on perturbation size. Hence, hybrid control tech- niques are essential. In a recent proposed hybrid MPPT tech- nique with both P&O and ANN, the perturbation step is contin- uously approximated by using ANN. Using this P&O-ANN hy- brid MPPT [52], on-line MPP tracking is possible. It is accurate and fast. Once tuned, it does not depend on environmental con- ditions. For strengthening search capability of the ANN-based MPPT technique, its weights should be properly tuned. Consid- ering this, the genetic algorithm (GA) concept is used for tuning SUBUDHI AND PRADHAN: COMPARATIVE STUDY ON MPPT TECHNIQUES FOR PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SYSTEMS 95 Fig. 13. Comparison between (a) traditional P&O and (b) multivariable P&O structures. weights of ANN in [53]. Similarly, a GA optimized fuzzy-based MPPT is proposed by [54]. In this technique, membership func- tions and control rules are simultaneously optimized by GA. Further, poor stability and power uctuation due to the highly nonlinear nature of the PV characteristics using simple P&O can be eliminated using the Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) [55], [56]. Once properly trained, ANFIS can interpo- late and extrapolate the MPP with high accuracy. Z. MPPT Techniques for Mismatched Conditions Since a PV plant comprises of number of arrays, it may happen that there may be different orientations of PV modules belonging to the same PV eld. Further, there could be shad- owing effects by clouds and bodies surrounding the plant. There could be manufacturing tolerances, nonuniformity of ambient temperature in proximity of each panel due to uneven solar irradiation and air circulation, dust and spot dirtiness (leaves, bird droppings). Mismatched conditions have strong impact on the shape of the characteristics of the PV arrays and the energy productivity of mismatched strings can drop down to 20% of that of the not mismatched strings. In addition, in case of mismatch, the characteristic of the PV eld may have more than one peak. Hence, MPPT algorithms may fail causing a drastic drop in the overall system ef ciency [57]. Distributed Maximum Power Point Tracking (DMPPT) [57] [59] allevi- ates the above mismatched problems, because in the DMPPT technique, each module uses a single MPPT. Five different distinct DMPPT approaches are described in [57]. DMPPT ensures higher energy ef ciency than other discussed MPPTs in presence of mismatching conditions. A recent MPPT technique is based on the Equalization of the Output operating points in correspondence of the forced Displacement of the Input oper- ating points of two identical PV systems is known as TEODI [58]. In TEODI-MPPT, each PV panel of a PV array has its own dc/dc converter but all the dc/dc converters are centralized controlled by a single control block. Further, a multivariable MPPT (MVMPPT), as shown in Fig. 13(b), is suggested in [59]. As shown in Fig. 13(a), the control unit of this MVMPPT takes the current and gives the signal for the controlled switches of the dc/dc boost converters. As shown in Fig. 13(a), in the P&O-based MPPT technique, the number of required P&O blocks is equal to the number of switching control variables , whereas as shown in Fig. 13(b), one block of MV-P&O is suf cient to generate multiple control variables. In MV-P&O the number of control stages is reduced compared to that of P&O. Hence, power loss in the whole MPPT system is reduced considerably maximizing the PV power at the output of the converter. III. COMPARISON OF MPPT TECHNIQUES In this paper, classi cations of the MPPT techniques have been attempted based on features, like the number of control variables involved, the types of control strategies, circuitry, and approximate making cost. A. According to Control Strategies Control strategies can be of three types: indirect control, direct control, and probabilistic control. Indirect control techniques are based on the use of a database that includes parameters and data such as characteristics curves of the PV panel for different irradiances and temperatures or on using some mathematical empirical formula to estimate MPP. Direct control strategies can seek MPP directly by taking into account the variations of the PV panel operating points without any ad- vanced knowledge of the PV panel characteristics. This is again of two types such as sampling methods [60] and modulation methods. In sampling methods, rst a sample is made from PV panel voltage and current . The sample comprises of power , and . Gathering the past and present information of the sample, the location of the MPP is tracked. In modulation methods, MPP can be tracked by generating oscillations automatically by the feedback control. B. According to Number of Control Variables Two different control variables such as voltage, current or solar irradiance, temperature etc. are often chosen to achieve the MPPT applications. According to the variables which need to be sensed, MPPT techniques can be classi ed into two types, such as one-variable techniques and two-variable techniques. It is easier and cheap to implement voltage sensor whereas current sensor is bulky and expensive and hence implementation of cur- rent sensor is inconvenient in PV power systems. C. According to Types of Circuitry The circuitry involved in MPPT techniques are of two types such as analog circuit and digital circuit. Preference of MPPT techniques is also dependent upon the fact that some users are comfortable with analog techniques while others like the digital techniques. Hence, the MPPT techniques are classi ed based on type of used circuitry (analog or digital) used. D. According to Cost Some applications need accurate MPPT and cost is not an issue, such as, solar vehicles, industry, large-scale residential. But some systems like small residential applications, water pumping for irrigation, etc., need a simple and cheap MPPT technique. Expensive applications generally use advanced and complex circuitry because accuracy and fast response are main priorities there. Considering the above facts, the MPPT tech- niques are categorized taking into account the cost involved for designing the MPPT circuit. It is very dif cult to provide exact 96 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 4, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 TABLE I COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT MPPT TECHNIQUES ACCORDING TO THEIR CLASSIFIED TYPES expenses in building each MPPT circuit due to unavailability of cost-data by the developer. Hence, in this paper, we have set a cost-line of US$1000 (in 2012); a cost below this line is termed as inexpensive while a cost equal to or above this is taken as an expensive MPPT technique. This categorization can be well described in Table I. IV. MPPT PRODUCTION, APPLICATIONS, AND EFFICIENCY CALCULATION Solar technologies are tested and validated by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, USA. MPPTs are primarily manufactured in Germany, Japan, mainland China, Taiwan, and the U.S. Some of the practical applications of MPPT techniques are in the solar water pumping system [36], solar vehicles (car, ights) [3], satellite power supply, off-grid [15] and grid-tied [10] power supply systems [14], and small electronics applica- tions [2] (mobile charging), etc. Getting maximum pro t from a grid-connected PV system requires knowledge about ef ciencies of the PV modules and inverters. Three different ef ciencies such as conversion ef - ciency, European ef ciency, static and dynamic MPPT ef cien- cies are de ned in [62] combined with their procedure of eval- uation. The MPPT ef ciency is calculated as follows: (31) V. CONCLUSION This review article provides a classi cation of available MPPT techniques based on the number of control variables involved, types of control strategies, circuitry, and cost of applications, which is possibly useful for selecting an MPPT technique for a particular application. It also gives an idea about grid-tied or standalone mode of operations and types of SUBUDHI AND PRADHAN: COMPARATIVE STUDY ON MPPT TECHNIQUES FOR PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SYSTEMS 97 preferable converters for each MPPT technique. This review has included many recent hybrid MPPT techniques along with their bene ts. Further, the review has also included MPPT techniques meant for mismatched conditions such as partial shedding, nonuniformity of PV panel temperatures, dust ef- fects, damages of panel glass, etc. It has also given the idea of commercial products of MPPT techniques with the company names wherever possible. The review has discussed the ef - ciency calculation procedure of the developed MPPTs. This review is expected to be a useful tool for not only the MPPT users but also the designers and commercial manufacturers of PV systems. REFERENCES [1] M. Ameli, S. Moslehpour, and M. Shamlo, Economical load distribu- tion in power networks that include hybrid solar power plants, Elect. Power Syst. Res., vol. 78, no. 7, pp. 1147 1152, 2008. [2] V. Salas, E. Olias, A. Barrado, and A. Lazaro, Review of the maximum power point tracking algorithm for stand-alone photo- voltaic system, Solar Energy Mater. Solar Cells, vol. 90, no. 11, pp. 1555 1578, 2006. [3] T. Esram and P. L. Chapman, Comparison of photovoltaic array max- imum power point tracking techniques, IEEE Trans. Energy Conv., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 439 449, Jun. 2007. [4] T. T. N. Khatib, A. Mohamed, N. Amin, and K. Sopian, An ef cient maximum power point tracking controller for photovoltaic systems using new boost converter design and improved control algorithm, WSEAS Trans. Power Syst., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 53 63, 2010. [5] J. C. H. Phang, D. S. H. Chan, and J. R. Phillips, Accurate analytical method for the extraction of solar cell, Electron. Lett., vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 406 408, 1984. [6] M. A. S. Masoum, H. Dehbonei, and E. F. Fuchs, Theoretical and ex- perimental analyses of photovoltaic systems with voltage and current- based maximum power point tracking, IEEE Trans. Energy Conv., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 514 522, Dec. 2002. [7] B. Subudhi and R. Pradhan, Characteristics evaluation and parameter extraction of a solar array based on experimental analysis, in Proc. 9th IEEE Power Electron. Drives Syst., Singapore, Dec. 5 8, 2011. [8] J.-A. Jiang, T.-L. Huang, Y.-T. Hsiao, and C.-H. Chen, Maximum power tracking for photovoltaic power systems, Tamkang J. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 147 153, 2005. [9] Y. Chen, K. Smedley, F. Vacher, and J. Brouwer, A new maximum power point tracking controller, in Proc. 18th Annu. IEEE Conf. Appl. Power Electron. Conf. Expo., Florida, 2003. [10] N. Femia, D. Granozio, G. Petrone, G. Spagnuolo, and M. Vitelli, Op- timized one-cycle control in photovoltaic grid connected applications for photovoltaic power generation, IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 954 972, Jul. 2006. [11] Y. Chen and K. Smedley, A cost-effective single-stage inverter with maximum power point tracking, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1289 1294, Sep. 2002. [12] W. L. Yu, T.-P. Lee, G.-H. Yu, Q. S. Chen, H. J. Chiu, Y.-K. Lo, and F. Shi, A DSP-based single-stage maximum power point tracking pv inverter, in Proc. 25th IEEE Annu. Conf. Appl. Pow. Electr., China, Jun. 12 15, 2010, pp. 948 952. [13] S. Jain and V. Agarwal, A new algorithm for rapid tracking of approx- imate maximum power point in photovoltaic systems, IEEE Power Electron. Lett., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 16 19, Mar. 2004. [14] O. L-Lape a, M. T. Penella, and M. Gasulla, A new MPPT method for low-power solar energy harvesting, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 57, no. 9, pp. 3129 3138, Sep. 2010. [15] V. Salas, E. Olias, A. Lazaro, and A. Barrado, Evaluation of a new maximum power point tracker applied to the photovoltaic stand-alone systems, Solar Energy Mater. Solar Cells, vol. 87, no. 1 4, pp. 807 815, 2005. [16] C. Hua and C. Shen, Study of maximum power tracking techniques and control of DC/DC converters for photovoltaic power system, in Proc. Power Electron. Specialist Conf., Japan, May 17 22, 1998. [17] L. Li-qun and W. Zhi-xin, A rapid MPPT algorithm based on the research of solar cell s diode factor and reverse saturation current, WSEAS Trans. Syst., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 568 579, 2008. [18] G. de Cesare, D. Caputo, and A. Nascetti, Maximum power point tracker for photovoltaic systems with resistive like load, Solar En- ergy, vol. 80, no. 8, pp. 982 988, 2006. [19] V. Salas, E. Olias, A. Lazaro, and A. Barrado, New algorithm using only one variable measurement applied to a MPPT, Solar Energy Mater. Solar Cells, vol. 87, no. 1 4, pp. 675 684, 2005. [20] Y. H. Lim and D. C. Hamill, Simple maximum power point tracker for photovoltaic arrays, Electron. Lett., vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 997 999, 2000. [21] F. Liu, Y. Kang, Y. Zhang, and S. Duan, Comparison of p&o and hill climbing MPPT methods for grid-connected PV generator, in Proc. 3rd IEEE Conf. Industrial Electron. Applicat., Singapore, Jun. 3 5, 2008. [22] W. Xiao and W. G. Dunford, A modi ed adaptive hill climbing MPPT method for photovoltaic power systems, in Proc. 35th Annu. IEEE Power Electron. Conf., Achan, Germany, Oct. 3 7, 2004. [23] L. Piegari and R. Rizzo, Adaptive perturb and observe algorithm for photovoltaic maximum power point tracking, IET Renew. Power Gener., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 317 328, 2010. [24] N. Femia, D. Granozia, G. Petrone, G. Spagnuolo, and M. Vitelli, Pre- dictive and adaptive MPPT perturb and observe method, IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 934 950, Jul. 2007. [25] A. Garrigos, J. M. Blanes, J. A. Carrascoa, and J. B. Ejea, Real time estimation of photovoltaic modules characteristics and its application to maximum power point operation, Renew. Energy, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1059 1076, 2007. [26] M. Calavia1, J. M. Peri 1, J. F. Sanz, and J. Sall n, Comparison of MPPT strategies for solar modules, in Proc. Int. Conf. Renewable En- ergies Power Quality, Granada, Spain, Mar. 22 25, 2010. [27] J. M. Enrique, J. M. Andujar, and M. A. Bohorquez, A reliable, fast, and low cost maximum power point tracker for photovoltaic applica- tions, Solar Energy, vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 79 89, 2010. [28] K. K. Tse, M. T. Ho, H. S.-H. Chung, and S. Y. Hui, A novel maximum power point tracker for PV panels using switching frequency modula- tion, IEEE Trans Power Electron., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 980 989, Nov. 2002. [29] T. Esram, J. W. Kimball, P. T. Krein, P. L. Chapman, and P. Midya, Dynamic maximum power point tracking of photovoltaic arrays using ripple correlation control, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1282 1291, Sep. 2006. [30] T. Noguchi and H. Matsumoto, Maximum power point tracking method of photovoltaic using only single current sensor, in Proc. 10th Eur. Conf Power Electron. Applicat., Toulouse, France, Sep. 2 4, 2003. [31] C. Liu, B. Wu, and R. Cheung, Advanced algorithm for MPPT control of photovoltaic systems, in Proc. Canadian Solar Build. Conf., Mon- treal, QC, Canada, Aug. 20 24, 2004. [32] N. Pongratananukul, Analysis and Simulation Tools for Solar Array Power Systems, Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electrical and Computer En- gineering, Univ. Central Florida, Orlando, FL, 2005. [33] D. P. Holm and M. E. Ropp, Comparative study of maximum power point tracking algorithms, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Applicat., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 47 62, 2003. [34] D. Shmilovitz, On the control of photovoltaic maximum power point tracker via output parameters, Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 239 248, 2005. [35] C. Hua, J. Lin, and C. Shen, MPPT based on standalone water pumping system, in Proc. Int. Conf. Comp., Comm.. Elect. Tech., Mar. 18 19, 2011, pp. 455 460. [36] C. W. Tan, T. C. Green, and C. A. H. Aramburo, An improved MPPT algorithm with current-mode control for photovoltaic applications, in IEEE Power Electron. Drives Syst., Malyasia, Dec. 28, 2005. [37] A. Mathew and A. I. Selvakumar, New MPPT for PV arrays using fuzzy controller in close cooperation with fuzzy cognitive network, IEEE Trans. Energy Conv., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 793 803, Sep. 2006. [38] C.-S. Chiu, T-S fuzzy maximum power point tracking control of solar power generation systems, IEEE Trans. Energy Conv., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1123 1132, Dec. 2010. [39] T. Hiyama and K. Kitabayashi, Neural network based estimation of maximum power generation from PV module using environment infor- mation, IEEE Trans. Energy Conv., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 241 247, Sep. 1997. [40] M. Veerachary and N. Yadaiah, ANN based maximum power tracking for PV supplied dc motors, Solar Energy, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 343 350, 2000. 98 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 4, NO. 1, JANUARY 2013 [41] A. B. G. Bahgat, N. H. Helwa, G. E. Ahmad, and E. T. E. Shenawy, MPPT controller for PV systems using neural networks, Renew. En- ergy, vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 1257 1268, 2005. [42] Y. Kondo, V. Phimmasone, Y. Ono, and M. Miyatake, Veri cation of ef cacy of PSO-based MPPT for photovoltaics, in Proc. Int. Conf. Elect. Mach. Systs, Incheon, Oct. 10 13, 2010, pp. 593 596. [43] B. Kaewkamnerdpong and P. Bentley, Perceptive particle swarm opti- mization: An investigation, in Proc. IEEE Symp. Swarm Intelligence, 2005, vol. 1, pp. 8 10. [44] S. Chowdhury and H. Saha, Maximum power point tracking of par- tially shaded solar photovoltaic arrays, Solar Energy Mater. Solar Cells, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 1441 1447, 2010. [45] C.-C. Chu and C.-L. Chen, Robust maximum power point tracking method for photovoltaic cells: A sliding mode control approach, Solar Energy, vol. 83, no. 8, pp. 1370 1378, 2009. [46] B. Khiari, A. Sellami, and R. Andoulsi, MPPT control of photovoltaic pumping system based on discrete sliding mode, in Proc. Int. Renew. Energy Congr., Sousse, Tunisia, Nov. 5 7, 2010. [47] Y. Jiao, F. L. Luo, and M. Zhu, Generalized modeling and sliding mode control for n-cell cascade super-lift dc-dc converters, IET Power Electron., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 532 540, 2010. [48] I. S. Kim, M. B. Kim, and M. J. Youn, New maximum power point tracker using sliding-mode observer for estimation of solar array cur- rent in the grid-connected photovoltaic system, IEEE Trans. Ind. Elec- tron., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1027 1035, Jun. 2006. [49] W. Xiao, W. G. Dunford, and A. Capel, Application of centered dif- ferentiation and steepest descent to maximum power point tracking, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 2539 2549, Oct. 2007. [50] W. Xiao, M. G. J. Lind, W. G. Dunford, and A. Capel, Real-time iden- ti cation of optimal operating points in photovoltaic power systems, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 1017 1026, Jun. 2006. [51] C. Rodriguez and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Analytic solution to the pho- tovoltaic maximum power point problem, IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. 1, vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 2054 2060, Sep. 2007. [52] B. Amrouche, M. Belhamel, and A. Guessoum, Arti cal intelligence based P&O MPPT method for photovoltaic systems, in Proc. Rev. Energies Renouvelables, Tlemcen, Algeria, Sep. 5 7, 2007, pp. 11 16. [53] R. Ramprava and B. L. Mathur, Intelligent controller based maximum power point tracking for solar PV system, Int. J. Comp. Appl., vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 37 41, 2011. [54] C. Larbes, S. M. A. Cheikh, T. Obeidi, and A. Zerguerras, Genetic algorithm optimized fuzzy logic control for the maximum power point tracking in photovoltaic system, Renew. Energy, vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 2093 2100, 2009. [55] A. Iqbal, H. A. Rub, and S. M. Ahmed, Adaptive neuro-fuzzy in- ference system based maximum power point tracking of a solar PV module, in IEEE Int. Energy Conf., Dec. 18 20, 2010. [56] A. M. S. Aldobhani and R. John, MPPT of PV system using ANFIS prediction and fuzzy logic tracking, in Proc. Int. Multi-Conf. of Eng and Comp. Sci., Hong Kong, Mar. 13 15, 2008. [57] P. Tsao, S. Sarhan, and I. Jorio, Distributed MPPT for PV arrays, in Proc. 34th IEEE PV Specs Conf., Jun. 7 12, 2009, pp. 2378 2384. [58] G. Petrone, G. Spagnuolo, and M. Vitelli, TEODI: A new technique for distributed maximum power point tracking PV applications, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Tech., Mar. 14 17, 2010, pp. 982 987. [59] C. A. R. Paja, G. Spagnuolo, G. Petrone, M. Vitelli, and J. D. Bastidas, A multivariable MPPT algorithm for granular control of PV systems, in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Ind. Electron., 2010, pp. 3433 3437. [60] E. Iyasere, E. Tatlicioglu, and D. M. Dawson, Back-stepping PWM control for maximum power tracking in photovoltaic array systems, in Proc. Amer. Control Conf., Maryland, 2010. [61] M. Valentini, A. Raducu, D. Sera, and R. Teodorescu, PV inverter test setup for European ef ciency, static and dynamic MPPT ef ciency evaluation, in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Opt. Elect. Electron Equip., May 22 24, 2008, pp. 433 438. [62] H. N. Zainudin and S. Mekhilef, Comparison study of maximum power point tracker techniques for PV systems, in Proc. 14th Int. Middle East Power Systems Conf., Egypt, Dec. 19 21, 2010. Bidyadhar Subudhi (M 94 SM 08) received the Ph.D. degree in control system engineering from the University of Shef eld, Shef eld, U.K., in 2003. Currently, he is a Professor and Head of the De- partment of Electrical Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, India. His research inter- ests include control and industrial electronics. Raseswari Pradhan received the Master degree in electrical engineering from Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India, in 2008. Currently she is pursuing the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, India. View publication stats