IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 7, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016 181 A New MPPT Design Using Grey Wolf Optimization Technique for Photovoltaic System Under Partial Shading Conditions Satyajit Mohanty, Bidyadhar Subudhi, Senior Member, IEEE, and Pravat Kumar Ray, Member, IEEE Abstract This paper presents a maximum power point track- ing (MPPT) design for a photovoltaic (PV) system using a grey wolf optimization (GWO) technique. The GWO is a new opti- mization method which overcomes the limitations such as lower tracking ef ciency, steady-state oscillations, and transients as encountered in perturb and observe (P&O) and improved PSO (IPSO) techniques. The problem of tracking the global peak (GP) of a PV array under partial shading conditions (PSCs) is attempted employing the GWO-based MPPT technique. The pro- posed scheme is studied for a PV array under PSCs which exhibits multiple peaks and its tracking performance is compared with that of two MPPT algorithms, namely P&O-MPPT and IPSO- MPPT. The proposed GWO-MPPT algorithm is implemented on a PV system using MATLAB/SIMULINK. Furthermore, an exper- imental setup is developed to verify the ef cacy of the proposed system. From the obtained simulation and experimental results, it is observed that the proposed MPPT algorithm outperforms both P&O and IPSO MPPTs. Index Terms Grey wolf optimization (GWO), maximum power point tracking (MPPT), partial shading conditions (PSCs), photo- voltaic (PV). I. INTRODUCTION V ARIOUS maximum power point tracking (MPPT) algo- rithms were discussed in literature [1] about the occur- rence of mismatched nonuniform insolation resulting in decrease in photovoltaic (PV) output power, and the hot-spot generated damages the PV cells. Since the dynamics of the PV system under partial shading is time varying, MPPT design for PV power system should be equipped with features such as tracking global maximum power point (GMPP) at different con- ditions, e.g., shading, degradation of PV cell, and adaptability to P V characteristics change in PV array, smooth, and steady tracking behavior. A number of MPPT techniques such as hill climbing (HC) [2], perturb and observe (P&O) [2] [4], and incremental conductance (IC) [5] have been proposed for improving the Manuscript received March 24, 2015; revised July 07, 2015 and September 09, 2015; accepted September 18, 2015. Date of publication October 26, 2015; date of current version December 11, 2015. Paper no. TSTE-00158-2015. The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Rourkela 769008, India (e-mail: kmsatyajit@gmail. com; bidyadhar@nitrkl.ac.in; rayp@nitrkl.ac.in). Color versions of one or more of the gures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identi er 10.1109/TSTE.2015.2482120 ef ciency of the PV system. The HC method uses a perturbation in the duty ratio of the power converter and the P&O method uses a perturbation in the operating voltage of the PV sys- tem [2] [4]. Both these methods yield oscillations at maximum power point (MPP) owing to the fact that the perturbation continuously changes in both directions to maintain the MPP resulting in power loss. The two in uencing parameters in P&O algorithm, namely perturbation rate and perturbation size, are discussed in [4]. To reduce these oscillations and improve the module ef ciency, the IC method was proposed [5] which reduced the oscillations but not completely. Both P&O and IC methods fail during those time intervals characterized by changing atmospheric conditions [6], [7]. A few improved IC algorithms were also proposed to improve the MPP tracking capability during fast-changing irra- diance level and load [8], [9]. To achieve a fast MPP tracking response, a simple trigonometric rule has been presented in [10] to establish relationship between the load line and I V curve. A dynamic MPPT controller for PV systems under fast-varying insolation and PSCs is proposed in [11], which uses a scan- ning technique to determine the maximum power-delivering capacity of the panel at a given operating condition. The focus of the research here is to determine the global peak (GP) during PSCs; in order to alleviate some of the issues like lower tracking ef ciency and oscillations generated in the PV output power, an alternative approach is to employ evolutionary algorithm (EA) techniques, which has the capability to han- dle nonlinear objective functions. Metaheuristic optimization methodologies such as particle swarm optimization (PSO) [12], and re y [13] have been extensively used for various engi- neering applications. Recently, Mirjalili et al. have developed a metaheuristic algorithm known as grey wolf optimization (GWO) [14]. This algorithm is inspired by grey wolves to attack preys for hunting purpose. Further, several works are reported in literature on an alter- native soft computing method known as grey wolf optimization which is attracting considerable interests from the research community compared to other optimization techniques because it is more robust and exhibits faster convergence. Furthermore, it requires fewer parameters for adjustment and less opera- tors compared to other evolutionary approaches, which is an advantage when rapid design process is considered [14]. After a thorough literature survey, it is observed that GWO has not been exploited for designing an MPPT. Hence, this work attempts to exploit the GWO for designing an MPPT to obtain ef cient tracking performance under PSCs. 1949-3029 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. Downloaded from http://iranpaper.ir http://translate68.ir 182 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 7, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016 This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes about the characteristics of the PV system under PSCs and the system description showing I V and P V curves of partially shaded modules. Section III describes the proposed GWO-based MPPT algorithm to track the GP and Sections IV presents the simula- tion and experimental results. Finally, conclusion is provided in Section V. II. CHARACTERISTICS OF A PV SYSTEM UNDER PSCS A. Basic Characteristics of a PV Cell A PV cell can be represented by an equivalent single diode model [2]. The symbols used in the model are de ned as follows: Ipv PV current source; D a diode connected in parallel to the current source; Rs the sum of resistances due to all the components that come in path of current which is desirable to be as low as possible; Rp to represent the leakage across the P N junction which is desirable to be as high as possible; I difference between the photocurrent Ipv and the diode current ID, which is given by, I = Ipv I0  exp qV + qRsI NsksTa 1  V + RsI Rp (1) where I0 is the saturation current, a is diode ideality factor, ks is Boltzmann s constant, q is charge of an electron, T is temperature in kelvin, and Ns is the number of cells in series. B. System Description A PV array consists of several PV modules connected in series to produce a higher voltage and in parallel to increase the current. During PSCs, multiple peaks, i.e., local and global maxima points are observed in the P V characteristics curve due to the presence of bypass diodes. The presence of bypass diode connected in parallel to each PV module during PSCs reduces the probability of hot-spot during which the shaded module behaves as a load instead of generating power. Two different PV arrays are considered in this work and are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. A con guration consisting of four modules in series (4S con guration) having two different shading pat- terns with their P V curves is shown in Fig. 1. The second PV con guration that has two series modules connected in parallel with another two series modules (2S2P con guration) having two different shading patterns with their respective P V curves are shown in Fig. 2. III. GWO AND ITS APPLICATION IN MPPT DESIGN A. Grey Wolf Optimization The GWO algorithm imitates the leadership hierarchy and hunting mechanism of grey wolves in nature proposed by Mirjalili et al. [14]. Grey wolves are considered to be at the top of food chain and they prefer to live in a pack. Four types of Fig. 1. 4S con guration under different shading patterns. (a) Pattern 1. (b) Pattern 2. (c) P V curves under PSCs. Fig. 2. 2S2P con guration under different shading patterns. (a) Pattern 3. (b) Pattern 4. (c) P V curves under PSCs. grey wolves such as alpha ( ), beta ( ), delta ( ), and omega ( ) are employed for simulating the leadership hierarchy. In order to mathematically model the social hierarchy of wolves while designing GWO, we consider the ttest solution as the alpha ( ). Consequently, the second and third best solutions are named as beta ( ) and delta ( ), respectively. The rest of the candidate solutions are assumed to be omega ( ). Fig. 3 shows three main steps of GWO algorithm, namely hunting, chasing, Downloaded from http://iranpaper.ir http://translate68.ir MOHANTY et al.: NEW MPPT DESIGN USING GREY WOLF OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUE 183 Fig. 3. Hunting behavior of grey wolves: (a) (c) chasing and tracking prey; (d) encircling prey; and (e) attacking prey. and tracking for prey, encircling prey, and attacking prey which are implemented to design GWO for performing optimization. Grey wolves encircle a prey during the hunt and the encircling behavior can be modeled by the following equations: D = | C Xp(t) Xp(t)| (2) X(t + 1) = Xp(t) A D (3) where t denotes the current iteration, D, A, and C denote coef- cient vectors, Xp is the position vector of the prey, and X indicates the position vector of grey wolf. The vectors A and C are calculated as follows: A = 2 a r1 a (4) C = 2 r2 (5) where components of a linearly decreases from 2 to 0 during the course of iterations and r1, r2 are random vectors in [0, 1]. The hunt is usually guided by alpha called leaders followed by beta and delta which might also participate in hunting occasionally. Delta and omega take care of the wounded wolves in the pack. Therefore, we refer alpha as the candidate solution having bet- ter knowledge about the location of prey. The grey wolves nish the hunt by attacking the prey when it stops moving. B. Application of GWO for MPP Tracking Fig. 4 shows the block diagram of the proposed MPPT scheme for the PV system. For number of grey wolves, i.e., duty ratios, the controller measures Vpv and Ipv through sensors and computes the output power. The owchart of the proposed GWO-based MPPT algorithm is shown in Fig. 5. During partial shading, the P V curve is categorized by mul- tiple peaks having various local peaks (LPs) and one GP. It is to note that when the wolves nd the MPP, their correlated coef- cient vectors become nearly equal to zero. In the proposed method, an attempt has been made to combine GWO with direct duty-cycle control, i.e., at the MPP, duty cycle is sustained at a constant value which in turn reduces the steady-state oscil- lations that exist in conventional MPPT techniques and lastly, the power loss due to oscillation is reduced resulting in higher system ef ciency. To implement the GWO-based MPPT, duty Fig. 4. Block diagram of the proposed MPPT method. cycle D is de ned as a grey wolf. Therefore, (3) can be modi ed as follows: Di(k + 1) = Di(k) A D. (6) Thus, the tness function of the GWO algorithm is formu- lated as P(dk i ) > P(dk 1 i ) (7) where P represents power, d is duty cycle, i is the number of current grey wolves, and k is the number of iterations. IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. Simulation Results To evaluate the performance of the proposed GWO- based metaheuristic MPPT algorithm, its performances were compared with P&O and improved PSO (IPSO) MPPT algorithms. All the above three algorithms were imple- mented under PSCs and rapidly changing insolation level for both 4S and 2S2P con gurations. For simulation stud- ies, the parameters taken for modeling single diode model of a PV module at nominal conditions are chosen as Pmax = 200 W, Voc = 32.8 V, Isc = 8.21 A, Vmp = 26.3 V, and Imp = 7.61 A. The components for the designed con- verter used in simulation and experimental setup are chosen as L = 10 mH, Cin = 100 F, C = 330 F, Vin = (0 130 V), Vout = 300 V, fs = 25 kHz, and output voltage ripple is 1%. The parameters of IPSO algorithm are wmax = 1, wmin = 0.1, c1,max = 2, c1,min = 1, c2,max = 2, c2,min = 1, and GWO algorithm is a which linearly decreases from 2 to 0. The power, voltage, and current for the 4S con guration with PSCs employing GWO, IPSO, and P&O are shown in Fig. 6. In the simulation study, pattern 1 is made to exist for rst 0.1 s and the second pattern appears for next 0.1 s. In pattern 1, GWO-based MPPT converges to the GP of 319.4 W, IPSO tracks the GP of 319.2 W, and the P&O algorithm converges to LP of 100.2 W as it is unable to differentiate between local and GPs resulting in steady-state oscillations, i.e., the operat- ing point oscillates around the MPP giving rise to power loss and also results in slowing down the speed of response of the algorithm and reduces the ef ciency of the PV system. When shading pattern is changed to pattern 2 at 0.1 s, the MPPT tech- niques get restarted and GWO-based MPPT is able to locate the GP of 329.6 W, IPSO tracks GP of 329.5 W, and P&O fails Downloaded from http://iranpaper.ir http://translate68.ir 184 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 7, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016 Fig. 5. Flowchart of the proposed algorithm. to reach GP and gets settled at LP of 180 W. From the above results, it is concluded that the proposed GWO-based MPPT yields higher tracking speed and the oscillations disappear quickly as compared to other two methods, namely IPSO and P&O. The simulation is now repeated for 2S2P con guration having two different patterns, namely patterns 3 and 4. The GWO-based MPPT reaches GP of 239.1 W, IPSO tracks GP of 239.05 W, and P&O algorithm reaches GP of 234 W anony- mously as it tracks the peak which comes in contact rst, i.e., it may be a GP or LP resulting in oscillations around MPP. All the above ndings are implemented for existence of pattern 3 which appears for 0.1 s and pattern 4 appears for next 0.1 s. For pattern 4, the GWO-based MPPT locates the GP of 251.6 W, IPSO locates GP at 251.5 W, and P&O gets settled to the GP of 247 W as before in pattern 3 resulting in oscillations around the MPP. The tracking curves are shown in Fig. 7. The simulation results presented in Figs. 6 and 7 envisage that the GWO-based MPPT can handle partial shading ef - ciently and it outperforms both P&O and IPSO with respect to faster convergence to GP, tracking speed, reduced steady- state oscillations, and higher tracking ef ciency. The simulation results presented in Figs. 6 and 7 are brie y summarized in Tables I and III. The MPPT tracking ef ciency is calculated as the ratio between average output power obtained at steady state and maximum available power of the PV array under certain shading pattern [13]. Further, a qualitative comparison among various fast-converging MPPT methods is presented in Table II. From Tables III and I, it is seen that the GWO-based MPPT outperforms over the other two MPPT methods. To ensure the effectiveness of the proposed MPPT algorithm, different loads such as an R L load (50 , 15 mH) are con- nected in place of resistive load and are studied for pattern 1. Fig. 8 compares the response of two different types of loads (R and R L load) from which it is seen in both the cases, the proposed MPPT is ef cient enough to converge to the GP successfully. Usually, for R load fast response is observed com- pared to any other loads. However, it is seen from Fig. 9 that GWO is successful in providing similar tracking response. B. Experimental Results To validate the effectiveness of the proposed GWO-based MPPT, experiments were carried out on real PV array for both 4S and 2S2P con gurations. Four 40 W solar modules of Sukam make are used in this experiment having rating of each module as Vmp = 17.15 V, Imp = 2.33 A, Voc = 21.2 V, and Isc = 2.55 A, respectively. To create partial shading, trans- parent sheets of different shapes were placed on PV modules. Here, dSPACE1104 is used as a controller having various ADC and DAC channels to generate PWM signals which are based on 603 power PC oating point processor running at 250 MHz and a slave DSP subsystem based on TMS320F240 DSP and Hall effect sensor is used to sense the voltage and current of the PV array before sending it to the controller. Fig. 9 shows the experimental setup of the proposed system. Downloaded from http://iranpaper.ir http://translate68.ir MOHANTY et al.: NEW MPPT DESIGN USING GREY WOLF OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUE 185 Fig. 6. Tracking curves for 4S con guration. (a) GWO-based MPPT. (b) IPSO-based MPPT. (c) P&O-based MPPT. Fig. 7. Tracking curves for 2S2P con guration. (a) GWO-based MPPT. (b) IPSO-based MPPT. (c) P&O-based MPPT. TABLE I PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED MPPT METHOD FOR 2S2P CONFIGURATION The two distinct patterns are shown in Fig. 10(a) marked as pattern 5 having GP of 113.8 W with two LPs and pattern 6 possess GP of 143.5 W with one LP. The experimentally deter- mined tracking curves are shown in Fig. 10(b) (d). The tracking curves show that GWO and IPSO-based MPPT converge to the GP of 113.8 W, whereas P&O gets trapped to LP of 53.44 W. The tracking speed of GWO is faster than IPSO since it takes 3.18 s to reach GP compared to IPSO which takes 7.9 s for global convergence. When the shading pattern 5 changes to pattern 6, the current MPPT restarts the search process for the Downloaded from http://iranpaper.ir http://translate68.ir 186 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 7, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016 TABLE II QUALITATIVE COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED WITH OTHER FAST-CONVERGING MPPT TECHNIQUES TABLE III PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED MPPT METHOD FOR 4S CONFIGURATION Fig. 8. Tracking curves for pattern 1 showing response of proposed MPPT having R and R L load under PSCs. new MPP from the new P V curve. The tracking curves of GWO and IPSO-based MPPT reach GP of 143.5 W, whereas P&O gets trapped to LP of 65.32 W. In order to validate the effectiveness of the proposed MPPT for a different random pattern, experiments were carried out for 2S2P con guration having two types of shading as shown in Fig. 9. Experimental setup for the proposed system. Fig. 11(a) as pattern 7 having GP of 77.98 W and LP of 47 W and pattern 8 have GP of 58.25 W and LP of 46.64 W, respec- tively. The experimentally determined MPPT curves employing the proposed and existing methods are shown in Fig. 11(b) (d). The tracking curves of the proposed and IPSO MPPT are able to converge to GP of 77.98 W and P&O by chance settles to the GP resulting in oscillations. After sometime when the shad- ing pattern changes to a new P V curve marked as pattern 8, once again the three algorithms search the P V curve for a new MPP. The curves of the proposed MPPT and IPSO-based MPPT converge to the GP of 58.25 W and P&O gets trapped at a local optimum value of 46.64 W. Downloaded from http://iranpaper.ir http://translate68.ir MOHANTY et al.: NEW MPPT DESIGN USING GREY WOLF OPTIMIZATION TECHNIQUE 187 Fig. 10. Experiment results for 4S con guration. (a) P V curves tracking curves using (b) GWO, (c) IPSO, and (d) P&O. Fig. 11. Experiment results for 2S2P con guration. (a) P V curves tracking curves using (b) GWO, (c) IPSO, and (d) P&O. Downloaded from http://iranpaper.ir http://translate68.ir 188 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SUSTAINABLE ENERGY, VOL. 7, NO. 1, JANUARY 2016 Fig. 12. Experiment results for pattern 5 showing response of proposed MPPT under R L load. To verify that the effectiveness of the proposed MPPT algo- rithm is working accurately under R L load, experiments were carried out for pattern 5. Fig. 12 shows that the settling time increases, but the performance of the proposed MPPT remains the same for convergence toward the GP. Figs. 10 and 11 show that the proposed method can suc- cessfully detect the shading pattern variations and reinitialize the MPPT process exhibiting superior performance in terms of faster convergence to GP, reduced steady-state oscillations, and faster tracking in PV system under PSCs. V. CONCLUSION This paper proposed a new evolutionary computing approach called grey wolf optimization to design a maximum power extraction algorithm for PV systems to work under PSCs. In view of assessing the effectiveness of this new MPPT (grey- wolf-based MPPT), its performance was compared with two existing MPPTs, namely P&O and IPSO-based MPPT methods and from the obtained results, it was found that the GWO-based MPPT exhibits superior performance compared to other two MPPTs. REFERENCES [1] H. Patel and V. Agarwal, Maximum power point tracking scheme for PV systems operating under partially shaded conditions, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 302 310, Apr. 2008. [2] B. Subudhi and R. Pradhan, A comparative study on maximum power point tracking techniques for photovoltaic power systems, IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 89 98, Jan. 2013. [3] M. A. Elgendy, B. Zahawi, and D. J. Atkinson, Assessment of perturb and observe MPPT algorithm implementation techniques for PV pumping applications, IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 21 31, Jan. 2012. [4] M. A. Elgendy, B. Zahawi, and D. J. Atkinson, Operating characteristics of the P&O algorithm at high perturbation frequencies for standalone PV systems, IEEE Trans. Energy Convers., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 189 198, Jun. 2015. [5] M. A. Elgendy, B. Zahawi, and D. J. Atkinson, Assessment of the incre- mental conductance maximum power point tracking algorithm, IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 108 117, Jan. 2013. [6] M. A. G. Brito, L. Galotto, L. P. Sampaio, and C. A. Canesin, Evaluation of the main MPPT techniques for photovoltaic applications, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1156 1167, Mar. 2013. [7] N. Femia, G. Petrone, G. Spagnuolo, and M. Vitelli, Optimization of per- turb and observe maximum power point tracking method, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 963 973, Jul. 2005. [8] K. S. Tey and S. Mekhilef, Modi ed incremental conductance algorithm for photovoltaic system under partial shading conditions and load vari- ation, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 5384 5392, Oct. 2014. [9] K. S. Tey and S. Mekhilef, Modi ed incremental conductance MPPT algorithm to mitigate inaccurate responses under fast changing solar irradiation level, Solar Energy, vol. 101, pp. 333 342, Jan. 2014. [10] T. K. Soon and S. Mekhilef, A fast converging MPPT technique for photovoltaic system under fast varying solar irradiation and load resis- tance, IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 176 186, Feb. 2015. [11] R. Kotti and W. Shireen, Ef cient MPPT control for PV systems adaptive to fast changing irradiation and partial shading conditions, Solar Energy, vol. 114, pp. 397 407, Mar. 2015. [12] K. Ishaque, Z. Salam, M. Amjad, and S. Mekhilef, An improved particle swarm optimization (PSO) based MPPT for PV with reduced steady-state oscillation, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 3627 3638, Aug. 2012. [13] K. Sundareswaran, S. Peddapati, and S. Palani, MPPT of PV sys- tems under partial shading conditions through a colony of ashing re ies, IEEE Trans. Energy Convers., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 463 472, Jun. 2014. [14] S. Mirjalili, S. M. Mirjalili, and A. Lewis, Grey wolf optimizer, Adv. Eng. Software, vol. 69, pp. 46 61, 2014. Satyajit Mohanty currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the National Institute of Technology Rourkela (NIT Rourkela), India. His research interests include modeling and control of PV systems. Bidyadhar Subudhi (M 94 SM 08) received the Ph.D. degree in control system engineering from the University of Shef eld, U.K., in 2003. Currently, he is a Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Institute of Technology Rourkela. His research interests include system and control theory, control of PV power sys- tem, and active power ltering. Pravat Kumar Ray (M 13) received the Ph.D. degree from the National Institute of Technology Rourkela, India, in 2011, in electrical engineering. Currently, he is an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, NIT Rourkela. His research interests include power system, and grid integration of renewable energy systems. Downloaded from http://iranpaper.ir http://translate68.ir