Wireless Sensor Networks From Theory to Applications Edited by Ibrahiem M. M. El Emary S. Ramakrishnan Wireless Sensor Networks From Theory to Applications OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOOKS FROM AUERBACH Ad Hoc Mobile Wireless Networks: Principles, Protocols, and Applications, Second Edition Subir Kumar Sarkar, T.G. Basavaraju, and C. Puttamadappa ISBN 978-1-4665-1446-1 Building Next-Generation Converged Networks: Theory and Practice Al-Sakib Khan Pathan, Mostafa Monowar, and Zubair Md. Fadlullah (Editors) ISBN 978-1-4665-0761-6 Game Theory in Communication Networks: Cooperative Resolution of Interactive Networking Scenarios Josephina Antoniou and Andreas Pitsillides ISBN 978-1-4398-4808-1 Green Communications and Networking F. Richard Yu, Xi Zhang, and Victor C.M. Leung (Editors) ISBN 978-1-4398-9913-7 Handbook on Mobile and Ubiquitous Computing: Status and Perspective Laurence T. Yang, Evi Syukur, and Seng W. Loke (Editors) ISBN 978-1-4398-4811-1 Identi cation and Management of Distributed Data: NGN, Content-Centric Networks and the Web Giovanni Bartolomeo and Tatiana Kov ikov ISBN 978-1-4398-7907-8 Intelligent Sensor Networks: The Integration of Sensor Networks, Signal Processing and Machine Learning Fei Hu (Editor) ISBN 978-1-4398-9281-7 The Internet of Things in the Cloud: A Middleware Perspective Honbo Zhou ISBN 978-1-4398-9299-2 Linear Programming and Algorithms for Communication Networks: A Practical Guide to Network Design, Control, and Management Eiji Oki ISBN 978-1-4665-5263-0 Multihomed Communication with SCTP (Stream Control Transmission Protocol) Victor C.M. Leung, Eduardo Parente Ribeiro, Alan Wagner, and Janardhan Iyengar ISBN 978-1-4665-6698-9 Next-Generation Mobile Broadcasting David G mez-Barquero ISBN 978-1-4398-9866-6 Optimal Resource Allocation for Distributed Video Communication Yifeng He and Ling Guan ISBN 978-1-4398-7514-8 SC-FDMA for Mobile Communications Fathi E. Abd El-Samie, Faisal S. Al-kamali, Azzam Y. Al-nahary, and Moawad I. Dessouky ISBN 978-1-4665-1071-5 Security and Privacy in Smart Grids Yang Xiao (Editor) ISBN 978-1-4398-7783-8 Security for Wireless Sensor Networks using Identity-Based Cryptography Harsh Kupwade Patil and Stephen A. Szygenda ISBN 978-1-4398-6901-7 Transmission Techniques for 4G Systems M rio Marques da Silva, Americo Correia, Nuno Souto, and Joao Carlos Silva ISBN 978-1-4665-1233-7 Wireless Sensor Networks: Current Status and Future Trends Sha ullah Khan, Nabil Ali Alrajeh, and Al-Sakib Khan Pathan (Editors) ISBN 978-1-4665-0606-0 AUERBACH PUBLICATIONS www.auerbach-publications.com 5P0SEFS$BMMr'BY E-mail: orders@crcpress.com Wireless Sensor Networks From Theory to Applications Edited by Ibrahiem M. M. El Emary S. Ramakrishnan MATLAB is a trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. and is used with permission. The MathWorks does not warrant the accuracy of the text or exercises in this book. This book s use or discussion of MATLAB software or related products does not consti- tute endorsement or sponsorship by The MathWorks of a particular pedagogical approach or particular use of the MATLAB software. CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group 6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300 Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 2014 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business No claim to original U.S. Government works Version Date: 20130701 International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4665-1811-7 (eBook - PDF) This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material repro- duced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint. Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://www.copy- right.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged. Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identifica- tion and explanation without intent to infringe. Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at http://www.taylorandfrancis.com and the CRC Press Web site at http://www.crcpress.com v Contents Preface ..................................................................................................................................ix Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................. xiii Editors .................................................................................................................................xv Contributors ......................................................................................................................xvii PART I DATA COLLECTION 1 Data Collection in Wireless Sensor Networks: A Theoretical Perspective ...................3 YU WANG 2 Data Aggregation and Data Gathering ......................................................................41 LALIT KUMAR AWASTHI AND SIDDHARTHA CHAUHAN 3 Spatial Coverage Estimation and Optimization in Geosensor Networks Deployment ................................................................................................................59 FARID KARIMIPOUR, MEYSAM ARGANY, AND MIR ABOLFAZL MOSTAFAVI PART II PHYSICAL LAYER AND INTERFACING 4 Overview of IEEE 802.15.4 Wireless Sensor Networks in Three-Dimensional Terrains ......................................................................................................................87 MU SHENG LIN, JENQ SHIOU LEU, KUEN HAN LI, AND JEAN LIEN C. WU 5 Multi-Interface Wireless Networks: Complexity and Algorithms ...........................119 ALFREDO NAVARRA, GIANLORENZO D ANGELO, AND GABRIELE DI STEFANO 6 Sensor Bus Architecture for Real-Time Wireless Sensor Networks ..........................157 ABRAHAM LAMESGIN ADDISIE AND KUMUDHA RAIMOND PART III ROUTING AND TRANSPORT PROTOCOLS 7 Quality of Service and Routing Performance Evaluation for IEEE 802.15.6 Body Sensor Networks Using an Accurate Physical Layer .......................................193 J. M. DRICOT, M. RINAUDO, GIANLUIGI FERRARI, S. VAN ROY, PH. DE DONCKER, AND A. NONCLERCQ vi Contents 8 Routing Protocols .....................................................................................................233 NIKHIL MARRIWALA 9 A Survey of Connected Dominating Set Construction Techniques for Ad Hoc Sensor Networks .......................................................................................................247 ARIYAM DAS, CHITTARANJAN MANDAL, AND CHRIS READE 10 Transport Protocols in Wireless Sensor Networks ...................................................265 PRABHUDUTTA MOHANTY AND MANAS RANJAN KABAT 11 Energy-E cient Medium Access Control Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks .... 307 MOHAMED YOUNIS, TAMER NADEEM, ALI BICAK, AND KEMAL AKKAYA PART IV ENERGY SAVING APPROACHES 12 Pulse Switching: A Packetless Networking Paradigm for Energy-Constrained Monitoring Applications ..........................................................................................337 QIONG HUO, BO DONG, AND SUBIR BISWAS 13 Handling the Energy in Wireless Sensor Networks .................................................369 VIVEK S. DESHPANDE 14 Cooperative Systems in Wireless Sensor Networks ..................................................389 RAWYA YEHIA RIZK 15 Evolution of Virtual Clustering in Wireless Sensor Networks .................................417 ASIS KUMAR TRIPATHY AND SUCHISMITA CHINARA PART V MOBILE AND MULTIMEDIA WSN 16 GPS-Free Indoor Localization for Mobile Sensor Networks ....................................447 YUANFANG CHEN, LEI SHU, AND LU CHEN 17 Mobile Wireless Sensor Networks: A Cognitive Approach ......................................491 M. SUJEETHNANDA, SUMIT KUMAR, AND G. RAMAMURTHY 18 Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks: Correlation-Based Communication ..........519 RUI DAI AND PU WANG PART VI DATA STORAGE AND MONITORING 19 Distributed Data Storage and Retrieval Schemes in RPL/IPv6-Based Networks ....567 PIETRO GONIZZI, GIANLUIGI FERRARI, J R MIE LEGUAY, AND PAOLO MEDAGLIANI 20 Monitoring Mechanism for Wireless Sensor Networks: Challenges and Solutions ...595 ABDERREZAK RACHEDI 21 Building and Orchestrating Centralized Remote Management Procedures for Wireless Sensor Networks ........................................................................................623 MICHAEL N. KALOCHRISTIANAKIS, EVANGELIA PSILIDOU, ARISTOTELIS KRETSIS, AND MANOS VARVARIGOS Contents vii 22 Quality of Services in Wireless Sensor Networks .....................................................645 RAWYA YEHIA RIZK PART VII APPLICATIONS 23 Arti cial Eye Vision Using Wireless Sensor Networks .............................................675 SHAIMAA AHMED ELSAID AND ABOUL ELLA HASSANIEN 24 Wireless Sensor Networks: A Medical Perspective ...................................................711 MOHAMED MOSTAFA M. FOUAD, NASHWA EL BENDARY, RABIE A. RAMADAN, AND ABOUL ELLA HASSANIEN 25 Smart Environmental Monitoring Using Wireless Sensor Networks .......................731 NASHWA EL BENDARY, MOHAMED MOSTAFA M. FOUAD, RABIE A. RAMADAN, SOUMYA BANERJEE, AND ABOUL ELLA HASSANIEN ix Preface A wireless sensor network (WSN) is a simple low-cost approach that can be used in a distributed environment. A WSN is a group of distributed devices that could be employed to monitor physi- cal and environmental conditions in real time. It is also used in the control of instruments, with the major bene t being that it provides e cient reliable communications via a wireless network. WSNs support the formation of connectivity independently in addressing and routing structures without much help from human beings. WSNs have certain traits of their own. The limitations of WSNs include power, low battery life, redundant data acquisition, low duty cycle, and many- to-one ows. New design methodologies could be adapted to overcome these limitations. Despite these problems, many WSN solutions are developed based on notions regarding wireless commu- nication and environment. Moreover, it requires an enormous breadth of knowledge from a variety of disciplines such as electromechanical computers and communications. There are many books on WSNs, mainly focused on beginners, which are already available in the market. A few books are available for advanced readers but they fail to provide comprehensive coverage. Hence, we thought of writing a book to ll this gap. However, because of the diverse richness and rapid development of the subject, we believe that only teamwork will yield good material for this hot topic. Consequently, we collected chapters from domain experts working on various sub elds of WSNs around the globe and edited these chapters to develop this book. We approached CRC Press with our proposal on editing a book on the said topic during August 2011. CRC Press accepted our proposal and subsequently we announced the call for book chapters to various academic and industrial experts working on WSNs worldwide. Forty-three expert teams submitted contributions from countries such as the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Mexico, Taiwan, Jordan, India, Iran, Italy, France, Egypt, Malaysia, Japan, Algeria, Saudi Arabia, Greece, Nigeria, Korea, and China. The materials presented in this book were reviewed by 36 reviewers and nally we accepted only 25 out of the 43 submissions based on the recommendations and comments from these reviewers. This book is an edited volume prepared mainly for senior undergraduate and postgraduate students, researchers, scholars and academics, industrial researchers, and practicing engineers working in the eld of WSNs and aiming to develop some genuine solutions for WSNs. We assume that the readers have some prior knowledge of computer networks, wireless communica- tion, and basic electronics. The reader is provided with a concise list of references at the end of each chapter. x Preface Organization of the Chapters These 25 chapters are divided into seven parts, namely, Part I: Data Collection; Part II: Physical Layer and Interfacing; Part III: Routing and Transport Protocols; Part IV: Energy Saving Approaches; Part V: Mobile and Multimedia WSN; Part VI: Data Storage and Monitoring; and Part VII: Applications. Data collection is a fundamental function provided by WSNs. How to e ciently collect sens- ing data from all sensor nodes, how to aggregate the collected data, and how to increase the cover- age area are all critical to the performance of sensor networks. Part I addresses these issues and contains three chapters one each on data collection, aggregation, and spatial coverage. Chapter 1 discusses data collection from di erent types of sensor networks. It starts with network models, communicative models, and related work. Later, this chapter focuses on data collection in random sensor networks. This chapter also elaborates data collection in arbitrary sensor networks under di erent categories. Chapter 2 gives a clear picture about data aggregation and data gathering in WSNs. This chapter deals with energy-e cient data aggregation protocols for a heterogeneous WSN. Various algorithms and protocols for data gathering and data aggregation are also dis- cussed. Chapter 3 provides a survey of the various methods proposed for the estimation and opti- mization of spatial coverage of sensor networks. In addition, the chapter also concentrates on the state-of-the-art sensor networks and their related issues in terms of phenomena type of the envi- ronment and sensor as well as issues such as coverage communication and energy-saving problems. Part II deals with physical layer and interfacing and also comprises three chapters. Chapter 4 deals with IEEE 802.15.4 WSNs. The architecture and functionalities of the ZigBee sensor networks are discussed. The IEEE 802.15.4 standard and the characteristics of 3-D terrains in WSNs are introduced. The performances of IEEE 802.15.4 WSNs in ve arti cial 3-D terrains are evaluated. A brief presentation on 3-D terrain visualization software is also available in this chapter. Chapter 5 is about multi-interface model. The idea is to exploit the heterogeneity of the interfaces available in modern devices in order to reduce energy consumption and prolong net- work lifetime. Several well-known combinatorial optimization problems are then reconsidered with respect to this new feature. Chapter 6 deals with the sensor bus architecture for a real-time WSN, and this applicability has been tested with three di erent sensor networks, which includes a real-world temperature sensor network from Texas Instruments. It has been integrated with the sensor bus to show its practical application in real-time temperature monitoring applications. Sun SPOT sensor networks, which generate random values using a Solarium emulator and a simulated sensor network, are also discussed. Part III has ve chapters on routing and transport protocols. Chapter 7 addresses the develop- ment of a speci c framework for the computation of the network topology. Link layer performance is evaluated and the link level throughput and delay are de ned. Routing performance is analyzed for IEEE 802.15.6. Chapter 8 focuses on the routing protocols that cover low energy adaptive clus- tering hierarchy (LEACH), C-LEACH, V-LEACH, N-LEACH, and PEGASIS, which are modi- ed versions of the LEACH protocol. In addition to discussions on multihop routing in wireless ad hoc and sensor networks, a detailed survey on various connected dominating set construction techniques for ad hoc sensor networks is given in Chapter 9. This chapter also provides details on various network models used for virtual backbone construction. In Chapter 10, the authors dis- cuss the di erent types of transport protocols in WSNs, and their guidelines performance metrics and congestion control mechanisms are shown. The existing transport protocols for WSNs are brie y reviewed and several problems in the existing protocols are also listed. Chapter 11 discusses energy-e cient MAC protocols for WSNs. It comprises radio energy consumption models, MAC Preface xi layer issues for WSNs design goals, energy trade-o s, and metrics. It also elaborates about the emerging MAC layer protocols such as Y-MAC, EM-MAC, and PIP. Part IV has four chapters exclusively focusing on energy e cient methods in WSNs. Chapter 12 focuses on event monitoring and energy saving in the WSNs. Energy saving is accomplished using ultralight pulse switching protocol for resource-constrained sensors in event monitoring and target tracking applications. The joint MAC routing architectures for pulse switching with the hop angular and cellular event localization are also presented in this chapter. Chapter 13 explains about energy handling with the help of previous research ndings and points out the major issues in energy conservation congestion control and avoidance in WSNs. Chapter 14 starts with the concept of cooperative multiple-input/multiple-output (MIMO) in WSNs and di erent forms of MIMO and its con gurations. Then, the chapter focuses on energy consumption techniques, the energy model, and a complete study of the parameters that a ect the system in various situations. The clustering algorithm, which is a kind of key technique used to reduce energy consumption in WSNs, is dealt with in Chapter 15. It details clustering requirement formation maintenance and the factors a ecting clustering network architecture, etc. The focus is given to discussing the application of WSNs in watering for irrigation and e ective usage of water in agriculture. Part V is on mobile and multimedia WSNs and has three chapters. Chapter 16 focuses on GPS-free and anchor-free indoor localization schemes. This chapter also comprises information on works related to mobile sensor networks along with the proposed network model. A cognitive approach in mobile WSNs is addressed in Chapter 17. The chapter also describes the various chal- lenges and design issues faced by MWSNs in addition to the major focus on cognitive radio-based WSNs. Chapter 18 introduces the acorrelation-based communication framework which leverages the spatial correlation of visual information in communication protocols for wireless multimedia sensor networks. A novel analytical spatial correlation model based on the projection geometry of camera sensors is provided in this chapter. It also provides a method for predicting the com- pression e ciency of correlated camera sensors, which is used to designed clustering and routing algorithms for multimedia sensor networks. Data storage and monitoring are the themes of four chapters in Part VI. Distributed data storage and retrieval schemes using IPv6 in WSNs are discussed in Chapter 19. The state-of-the- art on distributed data storage techniques and current standard Internet of Things protocols are discussed. Then, a distributed data storage scheme called the low-complexity greedy mechanism is presented and analyzed. Chapter 20 deals with the monitoring mechanism for WSNs. This chap- ter introduces various monitoring mechanisms and their challenges. This chapter also provides solutions for those problems using a wireless distributed intrusion detection system. Building and orchestrating centralized remote management procedures for WSNs using the TinyOS platform and OpenRSM is dealt with in Chapter 21. It details the application development in TinyOS. This chapter also provides details for installing TinyOS remotely using web-based technologies such as HTML5, AJAX, and middleware, which provide platform-independent operations. Chapter 22 addresses the challenges for QoS support in WSNs. This chapter describes QoS performance metrics in WSNs at di erent levels. This chapter provides details on di erent types of services in WSNs and various mechanisms to achieve QoS in WSNs. Most of the chapters that have been discussed thus far are oriented toward applications of WSNs in addition to their theoretical discussions. However, the last three chapters of this book in Part VI exclusively focus on the applications of WSNs. The ways and means to use the wireless body area networks (WBANs) in arti cial eye vision is discussed in Chapter 23. Details about WBANs, which includes the system prototype and the data rates, are given. This is followed by discussions on the types of sensor bene ts and challenges of WBANs, such as how WBANs can xii Preface be used in an arti cial retina. Chapter 24 considers WSNs from a medical perspective. It presents an overview of the e ect of WSNs on medical health care as well as highlighting the state-of-the- art in the applications of WSNs for tele health care. Also, this chapter describes the challenges introduced by health care applications to WSNs. Chapter 25 deals with applying WSNs for moni- toring various phenomena in di erent environmental elds. This chapter describes the challenges introduced by smart environmental monitoring applications of WSNs. MATLAB is a registered trademark of The MathWorks, Inc. For product information, please contact: The MathWorks, Inc. 3 Apple Hill Drive Natick, MA 01760-2098 USA Tel: (508) 647-7000 Fax: (508) 647-7001 E-mail: info@mathworks.com Web: http://www.mathworks.com xiii Acknowledgments We are directly and indirectly indebted to a number of individuals who assisted in the preparation of the book. In particular, we are grateful to the 36 referees who performed the task of reviewing chapters and providing valuable suggestions, comments, and criticisms in improving the quality of the work. Our special thanks and congratulations are due to the authors of the 25 chapters for successfully submitting their work according to the recommendations of the reviewers. The sup- port of CRC Press is really tremendous and is to be appreciated greatly. We are pleased to thank our colleagues for their cooperation in sharing our academic load during this work. We cannot nd the right words to express our thankfulness to our family members for their love, prayers, and backing. We are open to comments and criticisms from the readers in improving the quality of this book for future editions. Ibrahiem M. M. El Emary Information Technology Deanship King Abdulaziz University Jeddah Kingdom of Saudi Arabia S. Ramakrishnan Professor and Head Department of Information Technology Dr. Mahalingam College of Engineering & Technology Pollachi, India xv Editors Ibrahiem M. M. El Emary received his doctor of engineering degree in 1998 from the Electronic and Communication Department, Faculty of Engineering, Ain Shams University, Egypt. From 1998 to 2002, he was an assistant professor of computer sciences in dif- ferent faculties and academic institutions in Egypt. From 2002 to 2010, he worked as visiting assistant and associate professor of computer science and engi- neering in two universities in Jordan. Currently, he is a professor of computer science and engineering at King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. His research interests cover various analytic and discrete event simulation techniques, performance evaluation of communication networks, application of intelligent techniques in managing computer commu- nication networks, and performing comparative studies between various policies and strategies of routing congestion control subnetting of computer communication networks. He has pub- lished more than 150 articles in various refereed international journals and conferences covering computer networks, arti cial intelligent expert systems, software agents, information retrieval, e-learning, case-based reasoning, image processing, and pattern recognition wireless sensor net- works, cloud computing, and robotic engineering. Also, he has participated in publishing seven book chapters in three international books (published by Springer-Verlag, IGI Global, and Nova Science Publishers) as well as editor of two books from international publishers (LAP Lampert- Germany). He has been included in the 2013 Marquis Who s Who in the World. xvi Editors S. Ramakrishnan received his bachelor of engineering degree in electronics and communication engineering in 1998 from the Bharathidasan University Trichy, and his mechanical engineering degree in communication systems in 2000 from the Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai. He received his Ph.D. degree in information and commu- nication engineering from Anna University, Chennai in 2007. He has 12 years of teaching experience and 1 year of industry experience. He is a professor and the head of the Department of Information Technology, Dr. Mahalingam College of Engineering and Technology, Pollachi, India. Dr. Ramakrishnan is a reviewer of 14 international journals such as IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, IET Journals (formerly IEE), ACM Computing Reviews, International Journal of Vibration and Control, IET Generation Transmission and Distribution, etc. He is on the editorial board of six international journals. He is a guest editor of special issues in three inter- national journals including Telecommunication Systems (Springer). He has published 103 papers in international/national journals and conference proceedings. Dr. S. Ramakrishnan has pub- lished three books on computational techniques and speech processing. He has also reviewed three books for McGraw-Hill International Editions and four books for ACM Computing Reviews. He is a convenor of the IT board at Anna University of Technology-Coimbatore Board of Studies (BoS). He is guiding 10 PhD research scholars. His biography has been included in the 2011 Marquis Whos s Who in the World. His areas of research include digital image processing, soft computing, human computer interaction, wireless sensor networks, and cognitive radio. xvii Contributors Abraham Lamesgin Addisie Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Addis Ababa University Addis Ababa, Ethiopia Kemal Akkaya Department of Computer Science Southern Illinois University Carbondale, Illinois Meysam Argany Center for Research in Geomatics Laval University Quebec, Canada Lalit Kumar Awasthi CSED National Institute of Technology Hamirpur, India Soumya Banerjee Birla Institute of Technology Mesra, India and Scienti c Research Group in Egypt (SRGE) Cairo University Cairo, Egypt Ali Bicak Department of Information Technology and Management Science Marymount University Arlington, Virginia Subir Biswas Electrical and Computer Engineering Michigan State University East Lansing, Michigan Siddhartha Chauhan CSED National Institute of Technology Hamirpur, India Lu Chen School of Software Dalian University of Technology Dalian, China Yuanfang Chen School of Software Dalian University of Technology Dalian, China Suchismita Chinara Department of Computer Science and Engineering National Institute of Technology Rourkela Odisha, India xviii Contributors Rui Dai Department of Computer Science North Dakota State University Fargo, North Dakota Gianlorenzo D Angelo MASCOTTE Project INRIA/I3S (CNRS/UNSA) Sophia Antipolis, France Ariyam Das Yahoo! Research & Development India Ph. De Doncker OPERA Department Universit Libre de Bruxelles Brussels, Belgium Vivek S. Deshpande Department of Information Technology MIT College of Engineering Pune, India Gabriele Di Stefano Dipartimento di Ingegneria e Scienze dell Informazione e Matematica Universit degli Studi dell Aquila L Aquila, Italy Bo Dong Electrical and Computer Engineering Michigan State University East Lansing, Michigan J.-M. Dricot OPERA Department Universit Libre de Bruxelles Brussels, Belgium Nashwa El-Bendary Arab Academy for Science, Technology, and Maritime Transport and Scienti c Research Group in Egypt Cairo University Cairo, Egypt Shaimaa Ahmed Elsaid Electronics and Communications Department Zagazig University Sharkeya, Egypt Gianluigi Ferrari Department of Information Engineering University of Parma Parma, Italy Mohamed Mostafa M. Fouad Arab Academy for Science, Technology, and Maritime Transport Cairo, Egypt and Scienti c Research Group in Egypt Cairo University Cairo, Egypt Pietro Gonizzi Department of Information Engineering University of Parma Parma, Italy Aboul Ella Hassanien Information Technology Department Cairo University Cairo, Egypt Qiong Huo Electrical and Computer Engineering Michigan State University East Lansing, Michigan Manas Ranjan Kabat Department of Computer Science and Engineering VSS University of Technology Burla Sambalpur, India Michael N. Kalochristianakis Department of Applied Science Technological Educational Institute of Crete Heraklion, Greece Contributors xix Farid Karimipour Department of Surveying and Geomatics University of Tehran Tehran, Iran Aristotelis Kretsis Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics University of Patras Patras, Greece Sumit Kumar Communication Research Center IIIT Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh, India J r mie Leguay Advanced Studies Department THALES Communications and Security Colombes, France Jenq-Shiou Leu Department of Electronic Engineering National Taiwan University of Science and Technology Taipei, Taiwan Kuen-Han Li Department of Electronic Engineering National Taiwan University of Science and Technology Taipei, Taiwan Mu-Sheng Lin Department of Electronic Engineering National Taiwan University of Science and Technology Taipei, Taiwan Chittaranjan Mandal IIT Kharagpur Kharagpur, West Bengal, India Nikhil Marriwala Electronics and Communication Engineering Department Kurukshetra University Kurukshetra, India Paolo Medagliani Advanced Studies Department THALES Communications and Security Colombes, France Prabhudutta Mohanty Department of Computer Science and Engineering VSS University of Technology Burla Sambalpur, India Mir Abolfazl Mostafavi Center for Research in Geomatics Laval University Quebec, Canada Tamer Nadeem Department of Computer Science Old Dominion University Norfolk, Virginia Alfredo Navarra Dipartimento di Matematica e Informatica Universit degli Studi di Perugia Perugia, Italy A. Nonclercq OPERA Department Universit Libre de Bruxelles Brussels, Belgium Evangelia Psilidou Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics University of Patras Patras, Greece Abderrezak Rachedi Gaspard Monge Computer Science Universit Paris-Est Marne-la-Vall e Marne-la-Vall e, France Kumudha Raimond Department of Computer Science and Engineering Karunya University Coimbatore, India