Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 431 438 Silchar, India. December 16 - 19, 2021. 2021 NLP Association of India (NLPAI) 431 #covid is war and #vaccine is weapon? COVID-19 metaphors in India Mohammed Abdul Khaliq, Rohan Joseph, Sunny Rai School of Engineering Sciences Mahindra University, Hyderabad, India. {khaliq170568},{rohan18545}@mechyd.ac.in sunny.rai@mahindrauniversity.edu.in Abstract Metaphors are creative cognitive constructs that are employed in everyday conversation to describe abstract concepts and feelings. Prevalent conceptual metaphors such as WAR, MONSTER, and DARKNESS in COVID-19 online discourse sparked a multi-faceted de- bate over their ef cacy in communication, re- sultant psychological impact on listeners, and their appropriateness in social discourse. In this work, we investigate metaphors used in discussions around COVID-19 on Indian Twit- ter. We observe subtle transitions in metaphor- ical mappings as the pandemic progressed. Our experiments, however, didn t indicate any affective impact of WAR metaphors on the COVID-19 discourse. 1 Introduction Metaphors are cognitive artefacts to anchor one s thoughts and navigate a situation whether it is social, political or even nancial. Conceptual metaphors restructure an abstract domain in terms of a relatively concrete domain, in uencing how we perceive reality [Lakoff and Johnson, 1980]. Consider the conceptual metaphor, DREAMS are BUTTERFLIES . Here, the abstract domain, DREAMS is mapped to a more concrete domain as that of BUTTERFLIES evoking meanings such as vibrant and delicate. Linguistic metaphors are the manifestations of these conceptual mappings in text. For instance, Her eyes were full of vibrant dreams. India reported the rst case of COVID-19 infec- tion in January, 2020 [Andrews et al., 2020]. Soon after that, various control measures including the restriction on international travel, screening of air passengers and institutional quarantine were im- plemented to curb the infection. The government of India imposed the rst nationwide lockdown1 1 Coronavirus in India: 21-day lockdown begins; key high- lights of PM Modi s speech , Business Today (Mar 25, 2020). Available at LINK from Mar 25, 2020 to Apr 14, 2020 as a preventive measure to curb COVID-19. Various conceptual metaphors with source do- mains such as WAR (defeat the virus), HAM- MER/LANDSCAPE ( atten the curve) and even MONSTER (grappling with virus) were used to communicate state s guidelines as well as reactions to situations arising due to the pandemic [Ru ao and Silva, 2021]. In the mapping, COVID-19 is WAR, healthcare staff have been reconceptualised as warriors, and the citizens as soldiers ghting unitedly against the enemy COVID-19. Flusberg et al. [2018] advocate the use of domain WAR to deliver urgent communication infused with motiva- tion. Consider another phrase Covid 2.0: Threat of an administrative cytokine storm building up in India 2. Here, administration s RESPONSE is being compared to a biological phenomenon, CY- TOKINE STORM to emphasize the lack of atten- tion to ground-reality while drafting COVID-19 protocols. This mapping does bundle subtle as- pects such as failure to identify key points of action, overly restrictive protocols and its resultant unde- sired effect on citizens. Another direction of research on COVID-19 metaphors re ects on the appropriateness of these cognitive constructs in COVID-19 discourse. There is widespread discontentment against re-imagining the pandemic using source domains such as WAR or MONSTER which may negatively manipulate the understanding of the society. World Emergency COVID-19 Ethics (WeCope) Committee advise against the use of WAR metaphors as it instills fear amongst masses and leads to stigmatization towards those who do not respect the guidelines [WeCope, 2019]. H oijer [2011] calls out the use of metaphors as an instrument by the state to defend its actions and policies during the pandemic. Por- 2Blog by Samir Shukla, Times of India (Mar 30, 2021). Available at https://timesofindia.indiatimes. com/blogs/science-nomad/ 432 traying the pandemic as a WAR legitimizes state- imposed violence and excessive control. Kahamb- ing [2021] warns against the portrayal of COVID- 19 virus as Mother Nature s way to clean the planet. Sabucedo et al. [2020] further demonstrated the ill- effect of commonly used violent source domains such as WAR, MONSTER in COVID-19 discourse on public health. Semino [2021] thus emphasizes the need to reframe COVID-19 metaphors. Rohela et al. [2020] speak in favour of correcting the WAR narrative in COVID-19 discourse using substitute domains such as CRICKET and DANCE. Inspired from this debate, we study the metaphors embed- ded in Indian tweets posted during the pandemic. The main contributions of this study are: We manually identify COVID-19 conceptual metaphors used in headlines of major In- dian newspapers published from March 20 to May 21. We detect linguistic metaphors embedded in Indian tweets on COVID-19 posted between Mar 2020 to Jul 2021 by ne tuning BERT model. Using diachronic embeddings, we detect the transition in manifestations of conceptual metaphors as the pandemic progressed. We study the hypothesis if the conceptual metaphor WAR has an affective in uence on COVID-19 discussion on Twitter. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We discuss the prior works on conceptual metaphors in context of the ongoing global pandemic in Section 2. We describe data collection and the procedure to frame different conceptual metaphors in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the evolving interpretation of mappings as well as the role of WAR metaphors on COVID-19 discourse. We conclude our work in Section 5. 2 Related Work Wicke and Bolognesi [2020] studied the source domain WAR and how its pervasive nature when describing diseases, plays a role in the COVID- 19 dialogue. Prior research discusses the role of conceptual metaphors in moulding public per- ception in India [Rohela et al., 2020, Wagener, 2020]. Das [2020] describes the crisis and wrath faced by marginalized sections of society due to WAR centered analogies by the Government of In- dia. The readers are encouraged to refer [Rai and Chakraverty, 2020] to know more about metaphors and theories. Our work differs from the existing works in mul- tiple ways. First, our work focuses on the COVID- 19 metaphors of India. We detect metaphorical tweets and also label the underlying conceptual mapping. We study the transition in the linguistic metaphors as the pandemic progressed. Taking in- spiration from WEAT [Caliskan et al., 2017], we measure affective in uence of metaphorical tweets on COVID-19 discourse as well as see if WAR metaphors indeed present a grimier picture. To the best of our knowledge, this is the rst computa- tional approach designed to understand metaphori- cal themes in India during the pandemic. 3 Discovering Metaphors of COVID-19 3.1 Dataset Twitter is a micro blogging platform, used widely during the pandemic to express one s feelings and seek help. We extracted Indian tweets on COVID- 19 posted between March 20 to July 21 using snscrape3 library. A tweet is considered a COVID- 19 tweet if it has at least one COVID-19 related hashtag such as #coronavirus, #covid19, #quaran- tine, #covid 19, #vaccine, #TogetherAgainstCovid etc. To ensure that the extracted tweets are from India, we check if the location attribute within the tweet object pulled by snscrape contains India . Our dataset comprises of over 1.3M tweets. 3.2 Filtering literal tweets To lter out literal tweets, we ne tuned a BERT model [Devlin et al., 2018]. Two human annota- tors were asked to tag a random subset of collected tweets into categories metaphor and not metaphor, for the task of netuning. Both annotators are un- dergraduate students aged between 19 22, pro- cient in English with suf cient knowledge of In- dian society. The guidelines shared with annotators to identify metaphors in tweets is as described by Pragglejaz group [Group, 2007]. Below are the steps: Read the text to get a general understanding of the meaning Determine the lexical units 3https://pypi.org/project/snscrape/ 433 Establish the contextual meaning of the unit Determine if it has a more basic meaning Does the contextual meaning contrast with the basic meaning but can it be understood in comparison with it? If yes, mark the unit as metaphorical. A total of 3.7K tweets were tagged by annota- tors, out of which 1.8K were marked as metaphor- ical. We obtained Cohen s kappa of 0.719 on a common sample of 100 tweets indicating good re- liability of annotation. The hand annotated dataset of tweets is available at link4. We split this dataset into a training set with 3006 tweets, test and validation sets with 376 tweets each. On netuning BERT for 25 epochs with a learning rate of 2e 5, we obtained an accuracy of 74.4% on the validation set. On the test set, we achieved accuracy of 72.6% with a precision of 77% and recall of 67%. We used this netuned model to identify metaphorical tweets from the dataset collected in Sec. 3.1. Out of almost 1.3M tweets, the sys- tem predicted 264K tweets as metaphorical. We hereafter indicate this set of metaphorical tweets as M0. 3.3 Framing the source domain The next task is to derive a list of conceptual metaphors used in COVID-19 metaphorical tweets from India. #ReframeCovid5 is one such ongo- ing open-source work which collects metaphorical mappings present in global COVID-19 tweets and related media. For our study, we created a list of metaphori- cal mappings S0 (of the form SOURCE DOMAIN is TARGET DOMAIN) inspired from #Reframe- Covid along with the manual analysis of major In- dian newspaper headlines on COVID-19 published during Mar 20-May 21. Few examples are VAC- CINE is SHIELD, COVID-19 is TEACHER and PANDEMIC is SPEEDBREAKER. The complete list of mappings is available at link4. Prior works [Choi and Lee, 2019, Wicke and Bolognesi, 2020] used websites6 to extract lexi- cal units that they then use to frame the source 4https://github.com/makflakes/ Covid-Metaphors-of-India/tree/main/data 5https://sites.google.com/view/ reframecovid/initiative 6www.relatedwords.org domains. However, we found that the these lex- ical units are not used commonly in Indian En- glish. We thus use pretrained word2vec embed- dings [Mikolov et al., 2013] to expand the set of relatable lexical units/concepts close to a source domain s S0. We train a word2vec skip-gram [Mikolov et al., 2013] model on the 264K tweets in M0 to derive the lexical units . We de ne lower and upper thresholds for cosine similarity to lter out overly speci c as well as generic concepts. The thresholds are decided empirically. The set Ps de- notes the set of lexical units that we use to frame source domain s S0. Below are few lexical units from the set Pwar: ght, battle, defeat, enemy, soldier, menace, bi- ological war, weapon, battle eld, soldier, defend, warfare, bio war, unseen enemy, hero, confronta- tion, army, combat, biowar, invasion, biowarfare, destruction, war, attack, superpower, destruction, ghting, standoff, invisible enemy, invade, invasion We manually lter the list to make it contextually suitable for COVID-19 discourse. For instance, the above list for the source domain WAR comprises of words such as menace, hero, superpower which was used in literal sense while discussing the pan- demic. Therefore, these words are removed from the list. This forms the basis for identifying un- derlying source domains in Indian metaphorical tweets. 3.4 Identifying Conceptual Metaphors in Tweets In this section, we describe our approach to identify the inherent conceptual mapping that is, TARGET DOMAIN is SOURCE DOMAIN in the tweets. 3.4.1 Labeling Source domain We categorize a tweet t to source domain s S0 if t consists a word w Ps. There is a possibility that a tweet may have words related to two or more source domains. For our analysis, we have elimi- nated these tweets and will only be utilising tweets that uniquely indicate a particular source domain. Below are few example tweets: A storm is coming. Brace yourselves. Impact on Indian economy will be severe. I have started studying and will write a detailed article on it. Will publish soon. #coronavirusindia . - COVID-19 is STORM In a #World divided by #religion, greed and 434 Table 1: Top-10 Source Domains Source Domain #Tweets WAR 48415 MONSTER 2884 SUCCESS/CHALLENGE 1382 LESSON/TEACHER 1252 STORM 1213 DARKNESS 1080 PUNISHMENT/BANE 851 PRISON 851 LUXURY 602 CATALYST 542 SAVIOR 486 SHIELD/BARRIER 426 in ated egos, it took an invisible virus to instill a common fear. And we still believe that #human be- ings are the most intelligent species on this planet. #coronavirus - COVID-19 is DARKNESS Janata Curfew on 22nd March 2020 from 7 AM to 9 PM AND Ghantanad on 5 PM, which will help Indians to ght against the corona viruse. It will help to kill the devil - COVID-19 is MON- STER We list the Top-10 source domains on the ba- sis of their volume in M0 in Table. 1. It may be noted, this list is derived using s S0. It is thus possible that there are undetected source domains s / S0 with metaphorical tweets in our dataset. From Table. 1, we observe that WAR is the most often used source domain to describe COVID-19 re- lated events. Source domains such as MONSTER, CHALLENGE, LESSON, STORM also contribute signi cantly to the discourse. 3.4.2 Assumption regarding target domain Since the tweet extraction process focused only on tweets with COVID-19 related hashtags, it is safe to assume that all tweets are inherently de- scriptors of COVID-19 and related dialogue. We initially considered segregating tweets with vac- cine related hashtags to the target domain VAC- CINE. We discovered a total of 3701 metaphorical tweets on VACCINE. On careful analysis, we dis- covered that tweets tagged with VACCINE related hashtags, were also essentially reconceptualizing COVID-19/PANDEMIC. Few such tweets are pro- vided below. Another deadly wave of Covid19 is ravaging countries including India Stricter observance of anti Covid protocol and stepping up vaccination manifold are urgently called for to face the cri- sis #tkan #vaccine - VIRUS/COVID-19 is MON- STER Got vaccinated today with rst dose of in- digenously developed #Covaxin Thank you naren- dramodi. Thank you all the scientists who worked hard to invent the vaccine in record time. To- gether India will defeat COVID-19. - COVID-19 is WAR/VIRUS is ENEMY Due to the plentiful presence of such tweets in the VACCINE targeted set, we decided to go ahead with COVID-19 as the sole target domain for fur- ther analysis. 4 COVID-19 Metaphors of India 4.1 Evolving Conceptual Mappings As the pandemic progressed, the conceptual map- pings describing COVID-19 also evolved. Consider the topic of VACCINE, which was initially concep- tualized as a WEAPON7 to decimate the enemy, COVID-19 virus. Later, VACCINE evolved into a PASSPORT/TICKET8 to freedom which allowed unrestricted movement and gradually, it metamor- phosed to LUXURY9 which was rare and accessi- ble to only few. In this section, we study the evolving concep- tualization of COVID-19 through the notion of semantic shift. To compute semantic shift, the standard approach is to rst slice a corpus with respect to time. The granularity for time slicing may vary depending on the problem statement. For our analysis, we consider the duration (a) t0: during lockdown i.e. Mar 20 to Jun 20 (b) t1: post lockdown i.e. July 20 to Oct 20 and (c) t2: second wave i.e. Mar 21 to Jun 21. Given cor- pora C = [Ct0, Ct1, Ct2], the task is to analyse the change if any in semantic neighbourhood of COVID-19. Here, Cti indicates the set of metaphor- ical tweets posted during the time interval ti. On slicing the set of metaphorical tweets M0 from Sec. 3.2, Ct0 has 136K tweets, Ct1 has 39K tweets and Ct2 contains 65K tweets. We learn word embeddings using word2vec skip-gram architec- ture [Mikolov et al., 2013] for the rst phase using 7The Hindu, May 26, 2021. Vaccination is our only weapon available at LINK 8The Diplomat, July 12, 2021. Vaccine Passports: Ticket to Freedom or Path to a Divided World? available at LINK 9Quartz India, Aug 2, 2021. India s vaccine supply is a curious mix of abundance and shortage available at LINK 435 (a) Lockdown (b) Post Lockdown (c) Second Wave Figure 1: t-SNE representation of diachronic word embeddings time-speci c corpora Ct0. Here, the vectors are ran- domly initialized. For next two phases, we update the embeddings initialized with the embeddings learnt from the previous phase. In order to com- pare word vectors from different time-periods, we align word vectors to the same coordinate axes us- ing orthogonal Procrustes [Hamilton et al., 2016]. 4.1.1 Analysis To analyze the semantic shift in the conceptualiza- tion of COVID-19, we plot the t-SNE visualization [van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008] in Fig. 1 for all phases. Fig. 1-a visualises the semantic concepts re- lated to COVID-19 based on tweets posted in t0 phase. Fear and determination are re ected from the metaphors such as scare, fear, panic, worry, deadly, dangerous and combat, win, threat defeat, protect respectively used in this phase. COVID-19 is conceptualized as MONSTER, and even as an OBSTACLE/GAME (challenge, overcome, strike, tackle). This overview is consistent with the mixed feelings of fear and hope in the early stages of COVID-19 in India. The post lockdown embeddings are aligned on t0 embeddings. We present covid related concepts for this period in Fig. 1-b. Metaphors such as ght, call, win, race are getting closer to COVID-19 indicating the positive attitude. MONSTER related words such as fear, scare, deadly are moving away. BARRIER metaphors such as shield and other units such as nature, shame, ruin start to appear in this phase. Concepts related to covid from the Second wave embeddings aligned on t1 are depicted in Fig. 1-c. Defensive WAR metaphors such as failure, lose, tough and shield are getting closer. DARKNESS related metaphors such as grim, vanish, invisible can be seen. MONSTER related metaphors have come closer when compared to Fig. 1-b. Orienta- tional metaphors such as fall, and surge are also present. 4.2 Linguistic Metaphors To identify linguistic metaphors of each phase, we extracted the top-1000 words closest to covid19 from each of these phases. We manually go through this list to identify linguistic metaphorical units. Relevant tweets were retrieved when needed to sub- stantiate the metaphoricity and rule out the literal use. We present these linguistic metaphors in order of increasing distance from covid19 in Table 2. The foremost observation is the pronounced pres- ence of WAR metaphors across all phases. This 436 Table 2: Linguistic Metaphors of COVID-19 Phase Linguistic metaphors (w.r.t cosine distance from COVID-19 in vector space) Lockdown (t0) ght, india ghtscorona, battle, crisis, deadly, break, war, defeat, support, control, win, combat, attack, force, team, protect, hide, coronawarrior, threat, kill, dangerous, suffer, prepare, impact, isolation, hit, border, hell, solution, strategy, survive, ghting, corona ghter, unite, develop, strength, scary, destroy, isolate, disaster, tackle, scare, beat, deadly virus weapon, soldier, ghter, shut, shame, lesson, cover, enemy, scared, win battle, win war, danger, devastating, catch, surge, tracking, deep, victory, vulnerable, evil, cut, surpass, giant, expose, break chain, boom, unlock, push, hail, chain, atten curve, heal Post-Lockdown (t1) india ghtscorona, break, stand, block case, battle, line, strong, support, war, combat, save, warrior, frontline, duty, ghter, leader, play, win, strategy, fear, hit, control, covidwarrior, scary, deadly, attack, base, push, tackle, brave, hell, team, force, defeat, game, fall, race, power, action, united, build, struggle, beat, dangerous, kill, strike, panic, powerful, peak, danger, stage, crusader, frontline warrior, tough time, scared, deadly virus, deep, crisis, hide, throw, win battle, lose life, rage, threat, grim, nightmare, block, havoc, unlock, re, ghting, ood, wall, victory, impact, kick, boost, storm, invisible, weapon, disaster, shoot Second Wave (t2) battle, support, deadly, crisis, strong, win, suffer, defeat, hit, india ghtscovid, handle, dangerous, safety, warrior, control, strength, protect, overcome, fear, dif cult, attack, tough time, hard, scary, war, kill, struggle, win battle, tough, scare, pain, beat, peak, panic, strike, grim, catastro- phe, save life, unite ghtcorona, hell, shame, dif cult time, lose life, combat, frontline worker, stay united, devastating, disaster, wake, hero, breakthechain, powerful, shift, destroy, ghting, deadly virus, india ghtsback, blast, tackle, seek, shocking, dip, weapon, force, rule, front- line warrior, game, chance, strategy, decline, hang, target, lightly, enemy, border, wish speedy, lose battle, threat, loss, shall pass, push, catch, build, breach, blame, player, rage, bio bubble, shock, frontline, hit hard, nightmare, gloom, danger, tsunami, tear, kick, casualty, terrible, brutal, lethal, mark, pressure, devastate, devastation, includes enemy, ght, defeat, attack, weapon, bat- tle, casualty etc. We further note the presence of domains including MONSTER (deadly, scary, giant, fear), GAME (team, race, tackle, push, player, strike), STORM/DISASTER (crisis, dev- astate, havoc, ood, hail, tsunami), DARKNESS (hide, cover, nightmare, gloom, grim, invisible), HAMMER (beat, atten curve, hit, impact) and ACCIDENT (chance, rage, shock). There are also other metaphors such as dip, surge, blast, tear, kick, build, shame, hell, evil, heal, chain, deep in the corpus. During t0 phase, the closest words are ght, bat- tle, crisis, deadly, break, war, protect, hide etc. It may be noted that India had only few reported cases of COVID-19 in comparison to t1 phase. Never- theless, the metaphors are relatively grim and fear inducing. The fear of unknown and the lack of con- dence on Indian healthcare might be the reason behind these overly gloomy tweets. We note increased use of GAME metaphors in t1 phase when compared to other two phases. It may be noted that Post-Lockdown is the phase where India faced the rst wave of COVID-19. COVID-19 is discussed using concepts such as race, action, kick, team and block. Moreover, even WAR metaphors are used in more authoritative fash- ion when compared with the Second Wave phase. This indicates the transition in lexical manifesta- tions of WAR metaphors while discussing COVID- 19. Metaphors such as duty, strategy, push, tackle, brave, ghter, crusader convey a sense of control. The metaphors used in this phase indicate a more con dent and controlled reaction to the pandemic in comparison to t0 and t2 phases. We see the highest volume of metaphors in Second Wave phase. There are more negative metaphors such as battle, deadly, crisis, suffer, de- feat, dangerous closer to COVID-19 when com- pared with the previous two phases. There are also increased occurrence of DISASTER/DARKNESS metaphors such as grim, catastrophe, devastating, disaster, panic, nightmare, gloom, danger, tsunami etc. We also note metaphors such as breach, blame, rage, pressure from GAME domain indicating the shift in meaning of GAME metaphors. There is a clear difference in the underlying emotional tone of metaphors when compared with t1 phase. The rst wave (t1) de nitely saw a controlled strategy with manageable COVID-19 cases whereas the second wave (t2) witnessed more suffering, panic and lack of control which is also evident from the metaphors. 4.3 Impact of WAR metaphors on COVID-19 online discourse To better understand the role of WAR metaphors in COVID-19 discourse, we analyse if metaphors based on WAR mapping indeed paint an overly 437 grim picture contrary to the true reality of COVID- 19 in India. We take inspiration from Word Em- bedding Association Test (WEAT) proposed by Caliskan et al. [2017] to identify the polarity of as- sociativity between WAR metaphors and COVID- 19 concepts. We de ne our hypothesis Ha as WAR has an affective in uence if COVID-19 con- cepts show associativity towards negative or posi- tive attribute sets. The null hypothesis Ho there- fore is WAR metaphors have no affective in u- ence on the meaning of COVID-19 concepts. Let Do be the dataset of non-metaphorical In- dian tweets as predicted by the ne-tuned BERT model in Sec. 3.2. Let Ds be the set of predicted metaphorical tweets belonging to source domain s S0. For our analysis, we rst learn word em- beddings using skip-gram word2vec model on the dataset Do. These representations will serve as the baseline for our analysis. We ne tune the learnt embeddings using Ds to capture if there is a change in the meaning of COVID-19 concepts due to the source domain s. For analysis, let X be the set of COVID-19 tar- get words, and P, N be the attribute sets namely positive and negative respectively. We de ne (X, P, N) as the differential association of the target words embeddings for x X trained on Do and Do + Ds with the attribute sets P and N as in eq. 1. (X, P, N) = X x X f( xo, P, N) X x X f( xs, P, N) (1) where f(x, P, N) = p P cos(x, p) n N cos(x, n) xo refers to the embeddings for x X learnt on Do xs refers to the embeddings for x X ne tuned on Ds indicates mean, cos( a, b) denotes the cosine similarity be- tween the vectors a and b. Each word in sets X, P and N has occurred at least 20 times in both corpus and are provided below: X = { covid, corona, virus, lockdown, pandemic, coronavirus, health, hospital } P = {hope, faith, strength, unite, support, care, survive, recover} N = {death, panic, struggle, concern, stress, chaos, shortage, oxygen} Using permutation test for sampling, we discov- ered that the domain WAR is more close to attribute set P with p-value of 0.98. We reject our hypoth- esis Ha due to high p-value. It is thus not evi- dent from our experiments that WAR metaphors have statistically signi cant affective in uence on COVID-19 domain. We further performed this analysis speci cally for tweets posted during t2 phase. However, our experiments did not reveal any affective in uence exercised due to metaphors on the understanding of COVID-19. In future, we aim to design extensive experiments to understand the affective in uence of different metaphorical themes on COVID-19 discourse. 5 Conclusion Collecting data for any gurative text related task is a big challenge. Through this study, we release a hand-annotated set of 3.7K Indian tweets for metaphor related research. A wide variety of con- ceptual mappings were used in Indian newspapers while reporting COVID-19 situation in India. Nev- ertheless, we see a handful of these conceptual mappings in Indian tweets. WAR, MONSTER, DARKNESS and GAME are the most prominent conceptual metaphors in Indian tweets. Our results reveal the shift in the use of conceptual metaphors as the pandemic progressed. Despite intense dis- cussions on the appropriateness of the conceptual mappings used during the pandemic, it is not evi- dent from our experiments if WAR indeed led to an overly negative understanding of COVID-19 in India. References MA Andrews, Binu Areekal, KR Rajesh, Jijith Krish- nan, R Suryakala, Biju Krishnan, CP Muraly, and PV Santhosh. First con rmed case of covid-19 in- fection in india: A case report. The Indian Journal of Medical Research, 151(5):490, 2020. Aylin Caliskan, Joanna J Bryson, and Arvind Narayanan. Semantics derived automatically from language corpora contain human-like biases. Sci- ence, 356(6334):183 186, 2017. Won-Gyu Choi and Kyung-Soon Lee. Conceptual representation for crisis-related tweet classi cation. 2019. 438 Shreshtha Das. India s war on covid-19: how the gov- ernment is turning marginalised citizens into sus- pected enemies and criminals. South Asia@ LSE, 2020. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi- rectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018. Stephen J Flusberg, Teenie Matlock, and Paul H Thibodeau. War metaphors in public discourse. Metaphor and Symbol, 33(1):1 18, 2018. Pragglejaz Group. Mip: A method for identifying metaphorically used words in discourse. Metaphor and symbol, 22(1):1 39, 2007. William L Hamilton, Jure Leskovec, and Dan Ju- rafsky. Diachronic word embeddings reveal sta- tistical laws of semantic change. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.09096, 2016. Birgitta H oijer. Social representations theory: A new theory for media research. Nordicom review, 32(2): 3 16, 2011. Jan Gresil S Kahambing. Metonymies, metaphors and/or language reconsiderations for sustainability during covid-19. Journal of Public Health (Oxford, England), 2021. George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. Conceptual metaphor in everyday language. The journal of Phi- losophy, 77(8):453 486, 1980. Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Ef cient estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013. Sunny Rai and Shampa Chakraverty. A survey on com- putational metaphor processing. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 53(2):1 37, 2020. Pallavi Rohela, Anant Bhan, Divya Ravindranath, Devi Leena Bose, and Soumitra Pathare. Must there be a war against coronavirus. Indian J Med Ethics, pages 222 226, 2020. Teresa Ru ao and S onia Cristina Melo Silva. Strate- gic science communication: the atten the curve metaphor in covid-19 public risk messaging. 2021. Jos e-Manuel Sabucedo, M onica Alzate, and Domenico Hur. Covid-19 and the metaphor of war (covid-19 y la met afora de la guerra). International Journal of Social Psychology, 35(3):618 624, 2020. Elena Semino. not soldiers but re- ghters metaphors and covid-19. Health Communication, 36(1):50 58, 2021. Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of Ma- chine Learning Research, 9(86):2579 2605, 2008. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v9/ vandermaaten08a.html. Albin Wagener. Crushed by the wheels of industry: War, heroes, and domestic recolonization in the time of covid-19. Postdigital Science and Education, 2: 576 580, 2020. World Emergency COVID19 Pandemic Ethics Com- mittee WeCope. A call to cease the use of war metaphors in the covid-19 pandemic. 2019. URL https://eubios.info/yahoo_site_admin/ assets/docs/WeCope_Call_to_Cease_the_ War_Metaphor.167174242.pdf. Philipp Wicke and Marianna M. Bolognesi. Fram- ing covid-19: How we conceptualize and discuss the pandemic on twitter. 2020. doi: 10.1371/ journal.pone.0240010. URL https://doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pone.0240010.