See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/348375335 A Study on Vision Based Method for Damage Detection in Structures Chapter January 2021 DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-64594-6_11 CITATIONS 5 READS 810 3 authors, including: Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects: Structural health Monitoring and Assessment View project Vehicle - structural collision View project Narasimha Reddy Vundekode University of Texas at Arlington 2 PUBLICATIONS 5 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE Venkata Dilip Kumar Pasupuleti Mahindra University cole Centrale School of Engineering 49 PUBLICATIONS 55 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE All content following this page was uploaded by Venkata Dilip Kumar Pasupuleti on 25 January 2021. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. A Study on Vision Based Method for Damage Detection in Structures Narasimha Reddy Vundekode1 , Prafulla Kalapatapu2 , and Venkata Dilip Kumar Pasupuleti2(&) 1 MVSR Engineering College, Hyderabad, India vnreddy924@gmail.com 2 Ecole Centrale College of Engineering, Mahindra University, Hyderabad, India {prafulla.kalapatapu, venkata.pasupuleti}@mahindrauniversity.edu.in Abstract. To ensure the safety and the usefulness of civil structures, it is fundamental to visually inspect and survey its physical and functional condition. Current techniques in condition and safety assessment of large concrete struc- tures are performed physically promoting to subjective and unreliable outcomes, costly and time-consuming data collection, and safety issues. This paper pre- sents a study on less time consuming and less expensive alternative to the present methods of preliminary assessment for the detection of damages in structures. Henceforth, the focus is set on various vision-based methods for different parameters like cracks, corrosion and spalling which cause damage and deterioration of structures. Thus, a study is made on the current achievements and drawbacks of existing methods as well as open research dif culties are outlined to help both the structural engineers and the computer science researchers in setting a motivation for future research. Keywords: Damage detection  Vision based methods  Computer based techniques  Structural health assessment 1 Introduction Even though the use of concrete has started centuries back, larger light was shed in the 19th century. Many experiments were carried to combine concrete and Iron, later replaced steel in the place of Iron producing effective and economical structures [1]. From the beginning of its use, reinforcement concrete as a construction material has been accepted worldwide and usage is exponential. The amount of Concrete used in last two centuries is equivalent to concrete used in last two decades. As perspective of global development, concrete is highly preferred for various structures, but the major challenge is maintenance throughout their design life for the civil engineer community [2]. Severity of deterioration in structures depends on geographical location and its functional utility like structures nearer to the sea-shore are more prone to corrosion and spalling e.g. harbors, shipyards and bridges [3], whereas structures which undergo cyclic loading or subjected to fatigue stress lead to microscopic to structural cracks e.g. Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2021 P. Rizzo and A. Milazzo (Eds.): EWSHM 2020, LNCE 127, pp. 96 105, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-64594-6_11 beams, girders and tall buildings [4]. Initiation of internal distress is generally projected on the external surface of the concrete structure in terms of cracks and spalling. If these kind of damages are detected early, can prevent further deterioration and also enhances structural design life [5]. Maintenance of structures in countries like India with huge infrastructure commonly depends on Human visual inspection, which requires subject expertise in structural health assessment, types and severity of damages. At the same time this procedure has limitations related to human error, climatic conditions, time, accessibility and visibility. Computer s vision in the form of Arti cial Intelligence (AI) is playing a vital role to address the mentioned limitations. This study is motivated to nd solutions through images using AI for robust and faster visual inspection techniques. 2 Related Work Computer vision based techniques have evolved drastically in last two decades along with the higher degree of improvements, especially as an effective tool in the eld of structural health assessment and monitoring. Currently, human visual inspectors are replaced by self-navigating robots with the help of AI to assess all kinds of damages in structures [6]. Hutchison and Chen [7] worked on automatic detection of concrete surface damages like cracks and spalling from images using a statistical based method and relied on a Bayesian method. Lee et al., [8] proposed a model for accurate detection of cracks through integrating different image processing techniques, apart from that, class labels of the cracks were classi ed using a neural network based model. Kim et al., [9] surveyed on identi cation of cracks in concrete structures through various image binarisation algorithms. Silva and Lucena [10] demonstrated the capability of deep learning approach for concrete crack detection. Choi and Kim [11] carried research to identify the corrosion type based on the morphology of the corroded surface and for training and testing the classi er, 150 to 200 images were taken under optical microscope considering the features like color, texture and shape. Medeiros et al. [12] demonstrated the segregation of corroded and non-corroded surfaces using texture descriptors obtained from GLCM (grey level co-occurrence matrix) and color. Itzhak et al., [13] was the rst to carry out research on pitting corrosion using digital image processing. Kim et al., [14] presented on Terrestrial laser scanner(TLS) for the detection of surface damages on concrete using laser and simultaneously locate and quantify the spalling defects. Similarly, Dawood et al., [15] developed a model to detect and quantify spalling by image data processing and machine learning techniques. Author was successful in getting the results about 89 to 90% accurate, with only limitation of not providing exact shape of damaged region. Hoang et al., [16] proposed a model using hybridization of image texture analysis and machine learning techniques to characterize the condition of concrete wall surface. In line with that many researchers have attempted to develop a model which can classify all types of damages seen on a single structure. Lin et al., [17] studied on different types of damages caused during the natural disasters like earthquake, tsunami and debris ows. Damages can vary in its scale from collapsing of structures, breaking of bridges and cracks on roads, author also discussed the role of computer vision based technique in the prevention of structural A Study on Vision Based Method for Damage Detection in Structures 97 damages. Spencer et al., [18] did a detail review on recent advances in computer vision techniques applied to various civil infrastructure for structural health assessment considering visual defects like cracks in concrete, concrete spalling, fatigue cracks in steel, steel corrosion and Asphalt damages. Authors also detailed damage detection methods like heuristic feature-extraction, deep learning-based damage detection, and change detection. Apart from the damage detection techniques vision based methods are also currently used in calculation of compressive strength of concrete, which is taken as a video or set of image frames during the lab experiment [19 21]. 3 Methodology To understand damages in various locations of a structure, we have experimented with the latest technological advancements by using algorithms in Machine Learning (ML) and Arti cial Neural networks (ANN). Considering Images as samples we can de ne ML as the Area of study that enables Systems to learn without being explicitly programmed . At its most fundamental it is the act of utilizing algorithms to tokenize data, learn from it, and afterward estimate or predict something. So instead of hand- coding the programming schedules with a particular set of instructions to achieve a speci c task, the machine is trained utilizing huge amounts of data that gives to the machine the ability to gure out how to learn to perform the task. The challenge is, ML models need to be input with relevant features and it might be complex to nd the right combination of features to correctly identify and classify the objects in the images. To overcome the aforementioned problem, Deep Learning (DL), a special discipline in ML is required for classi cation purposes. Neural Networks are inspired by our under- standing of the biology of our brains. In the current work the image processing is carried out in order to automatically crop out the object of interest from the whole images. The crops will feed the DL classi cation tool and they will be classi ed into three classes as Crack or No Crack, Corrosion or No Corrosion and Spalling or No Spalling. To train a network from scratch requires hundreds of thousands of labelled images. In order to deal with the availability of a smaller dataset (200 each of crack, corrosion and spalling), pre-trained networks are adopted for the purpose. That process is called Transfer Learning and it is commonly used in deep learning applications. Fine-tuning a network with transfer learning is much faster and easier than constructing and training a new network. The advantage of transfer learning is that the pre-trained network has already learned a rich set of features. These features can be applied to the broad range of other similar tasks. To use that networks for the purpose of damage detection in structures, only the fully connected last layers need to be changed intro- ducing the desired labels. To experiment, we have chosen AlexNet architecture which measures the performances in terms of precision and accuracy as well as in terms of time consumed for training and testing. 3.1 Dataset Building Images used to build the dataset for this study are collected during the visual inspec- tions of various structures carried in the last four years. Even though images have been 98 N. R. Vundekode et al. captured from different devices, they are standardized into the resolution of 227  227  3 RGB before importing into the model. Majority of the images related to crack are obtained from the visual inspection carried out for four hundred national highway bridges and residential buildings, as they have single crack to multiple cracks on the surfaces. Concrete Bridges nearer to sea-shore had high corrosion and spalling when compared to the bridges which are in other part of the country or 300 to 400 km away from the shores. Spalling was also seen in the bridges which were very old and had less maintenance. Figure 1 depicts various damages captured during site investi- gations for concrete and steel infrastructure. Figure 1(a) shows minor hairline cracks to structural cracks, Fig. 1(b) shows quantity of corrosion increasing from left to right and largely calculated on surface area rather than depth of the corrosion and Fig. 1(c) shows minor spalling to major spalling, this is also calculated on surface area exposure. Figure 1(a c) are arranged in such way that the severity of damage is increasing from left to right. Figure 1 shows images capture from bridge inspection, similarly large database is also created from the visual assessment of residential and historical structures too. Images were added from every perspective and not necessarily taken perpendicular to the damage. So that the code can more robust and implemented directly on live project site investigations. Fig. 1. Images captured during the bridge visual Inspections (a) Cracks (b) Corrosion (c) Spalling, images are arranged in the increasing severity of the damage from left to right. A Study on Vision Based Method for Damage Detection in Structures 99 3.2 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are special kind of multi-layer neural networks, designed to recognize visual patterns directly from pixel images with minimal pre- processing. To implement these CNN s we require complex computational power, so it is easily accessible via software programs or architectures like LeNet, AlexNet, ResNet etc. Among which we have experimented using AlexNet. Figure 2 represents proposed architecture for this research work. Dataset comprises of 600 images in total undergoes training individually and images are ltered based on its noise. Few images with greater noise get rejected and accepted images are taken to next step for feature extraction and feature learning. As a next step AlexNet architecture is proposed to classify the dataset further. Firstly, it goes through a large convolutional layer and max pooling layer and process is repeated twice to detect the object (crack, corrosion and spalling) in the images. Then the images go through three smaller convolutional layers followed by a maxpooling layer. In pipeline images are attened and connected with the several fully-connected layers. The activation functions are all Recti ed Linear Units (ReLU) which is mostly preferred for accurate predictions. Model built using such small dataset, the training time is around 60 s using a GPU and around 90 min using only the CPU for AlexNet architecture. The training and testing ratio considered in this study is 9:1 for good accuracy, if the ratio is 8:2 or 7:3 the accuracy of the results will be decreased as the trained images are less. Fig. 2. Proposed architecture 100 N. R. Vundekode et al. 4 Results and Discussion The proposed methodology has resulted in good accuracies even though the dataset is small. As described experiments were carried on three classes of images i.e. crack, corrosion and spalling. 4.1 Crack Detection Identi cation of crack at early stage is important as it effects the strength and stiffness of the structure. Figure 3 demonstrates the outcome of the proposed architecture using AlexNet which was successful in identifying hairline crack to the severe structural cracks. The model was also able to classify single and multiple cracks with different contrasts. Figure 4 shows the results of the model which is trained using 200 images with 9:1 training and testing ratio which has taken 6 epochs and 204 iterations with the learning rate of 0.0001 by achieving 98% accuracy for image classi cation in labelling cracks and no cracks. The accuracies can increase or decrease based on the size of the dataset, varieties of the images in the dataset and the ratio of training and testing. So, in this case achieved accuracy is considered to be good. Similar observations were made related to the accuracies while experimenting other two classes of images. Fig. 3. Model for crack detection A Study on Vision Based Method for Damage Detection in Structures 101 4.2 Corrosion Detection Corrosion detection at early stages in steel structures plays a vital role and automatic detection could be one of the most needed solution for the current scenarios consid- ering the scale of infrastructure. Figure 5 demonstrates the outcome of the proposed architecture using AlexNet which was successful in identifying rust and no rust for various given scenarios. Fig. 4. Training and validation of results for crack dataset with accuracy and loss while training images. Fig. 5. Model for corrosion detection 102 N. R. Vundekode et al. Figure 6 shows the results of the model which is trained using 200 images with 9:1 training and testing ratio which has taken 6 epochs and 210 iterations with the learning rate of 0.0001 by achieving 95.33% accuracy for image classi cation in labelling rust and no rust. 4.3 Spalling Detection Detecting spalling at the initial stage can arrest the further deterioration, largely spalling is observed at the seashore or in the old structures. Fig. 6. Training and validation of results for corrosion dataset with accuracy and loss while training images. Fig. 7. Model for spalling detection A Study on Vision Based Method for Damage Detection in Structures 103 Figure 7 demonstrates the outcome of the proposed architecture using AlexNet which was successful in identifying spalling and no spalling for various given scenarios. Figure 8 shows the results of the model which is trained using 200 images with 9:1 training and testing ratio which has taken 6 epochs and 102 iterations with the learning rate of 0.0001 by achieving 97.22% accuracy for image classi cation in labelling spalling and no spalling. 5 Conclusions The proposed architecture in the study is easy, faster and robust as the obtained results for all the three classes resulted in higher accuracies. Dataset created had varied variety of images and it shows that this method is capable of identifying three categories of damages crack, corrosion and spalling. Increased dataset can lead to higher accuracy and more types of damages can be detected. Can attempt in using different software archi- tectures to observe the accuracies. Faster development in this line of integrating Arti cial Neural Networks to structural health assessment problems can provide robust solutions and save man-hours and also economy of any country apart from sudden failures. References 1. Stuart, T.: The early use of reinforced concrete in India. In: Huerta, S (ed.) I. Juan de Herrera, SEdHC, ETSAM, A. E. Benvenuto, COAM, F. Dragados, Madrid (2003) 2. Gardner, D., Lark, R., Jefferson, T., Davies, R.: A survey on problems encountered in current concrete construction and the potential bene ts of self-healing cementitious materials. Case stud. Const. Mater. 8, 238 247 (2018) Fig. 8. Training and validation of results for spalling dataset with accuracy and loss while training images. 104 N. R. Vundekode et al. 3. Valdez, B., Ramirez, J., Eliezer, A., Schorr, M., Ramos, R., Salinas, R.: Corrosion assessment of infrastructure assets in coastal seas. J. Mar. Eng. Technol. 15(3), 124 134 (2016) 4. Mohan, A., Poobal, S.: Crack detection using image processing: a critical review and analysis. Alexandria Eng. J. 57(2), 787 798 (2018) 5. Dhital, D., Lee, J.R.: A fully non-contact ultrasonic propagation imaging system for closed surface crack evaluation. Exp. Mech. 52(8), 1111 1122 (2012) 6. Hoskere, V., Narazaki, Y., Hoang, T., Spencer Jr, B.: Vision-based structural inspection using multiscale deep convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint http://arxiv.org/abs/ 1805.01055 (2018) 7. Hutchinson, T.C., Chen, Z.: Improved image analysis for evaluating concrete damage. J. Comput. Civ. Eng. 20(3), 210 216 (2006) 8. Chen, L.C., Shao, Y.C., Jan, H.H., Huang, C.W., Tien, Y.M.: Measuring system for cracks in concrete using multitemporal images. J. Surv. Eng. 132(2), 77 82 (2006) 9. Kim, H., Ahn, E., Cho, S., Shin, M., Sim, S.H.: Comparative analysis of image binarization methods for crack identi cation in concrete structures. Cem. Concr. Res. 99, 53 61 (2017) 10. Silva, W.R.L.D., Lucena, D.S.D.: Concrete cracks detection based on deep learning image classi cation. In: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute Proceedings, vol. 2, no. 8, p. 489 (2018) 11. Choi, K.Y., Kim, S.S.: Morphological analysis and classi cation of types of surface corrosion damage by digital image processing. Corros. Sci. 47(1), 1 15 (2005) 12. Medeiros, F.N., Ramalho, G.L., Bento, M.P., Medeiros, L.C.: On the evaluation of texture and color features for nondestructive corrosion detection. EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process. 2010(1), 817473 (2010) 13. Itzhak, D., Dinstein, I., Zilberberg, T.: Pitting corrosion evaluation by computer image processing. Corros. Sci. 21(1), 17 22 (1981) 14. Kim, M.K., Sohn, H., Chang, C.C.: Localization and quanti cation of concrete spalling defects using terrestrial laser scanning. J. Comput. Civ. Eng. 29(6), 04014086 (2015) 15. Dawood, T., Zhu, Z., Zayed, T.: Machine vision-based model for spalling detection and quanti cation in subway networks. Autom. Const. 81, 149 160 (2017) 16. Hoang, N.D., Nguyen, Q. L., Tran, X.L.: Automatic detection of concrete spalling using piecewise linear stochastic gradient descent logistic regression and image texture analysis. Complexity 20(5), 536 572 (2019) 17. Lin, C.W., Hsu, W.K., Chiou, D.J., Chen, C.W., Chiang, W.L.: Smart monitoring system with multi-criteria decision using a feature based computer vision technique. Smart Struct. Syst. 15(6), 1583 1600 (2015) 18. Spencer Jr., B.F., Hoskere, V., Narazaki, Y.: Advances in computer vision-based civil infrastructure inspection and monitoring. Engineering 5(2), 199 222 (2019) 19. Baygin, M., Ozkaya, S.G., Ozdemir, M.A., Kazaz, I.: A new approach based on image processing for measuring compressive strength of structures. Int. J. Intell. Syst. Appl. Eng. 6 (10), 21 25 (2017) 20. Dogan, G., Arslan, M.H., Ceylan, M.: Concrete compressive strength detection using image processing based new test method. Measurement 109, 137 148 (2017) 21. Choi, S., Shah, S.P.: Measurement of deformations on concrete subjected to compression using image correlation. Exp. Mech. 37(3), 307 313 (1997) A Study on Vision Based Method for Damage Detection in Structures 105 View publication stats